







THIRD EDIT "ION 


ISADEL BRIGCS MYERS | MARYTEESMCPAULLETY 


Jenni jr. Rt du i 
A 
iu L1 EE 











THORA wy 


MBTI Manual 


NZ 
Us 


PimaCommunityCollege 
Donated by: 








Downtown Campus 








Advising and Counseling 











un WA 


pt aia 





: JULLE 
gue 05709-2035 


MB II Manua 


A Guide to the Development 
and Use of the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator 


Third Edition 


Isabel Briggs Myers 
Mary H. McCaulley 
Naomi L. Quenk 
Allen L. Hammer 


p 


CONSULTING PSYCHOLOGISTS PRESS, INC. 
Palo Alto, California 


Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc 

3803 East Bayshore Road, Palo Alto, C A 94303 
800-624-1765 

www mhti.com 


Copyright © 1998 by C onsulung Psychologists Press. Inc. All rights reserved No part of this book 
mav he reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, elec- 
tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission of the pub- 
lisher. except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical arucles or reviews 


Q2 010090 1098 765 43 
Printed in the United States of America 


ISBN 0-89106-1 30-4 


Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, MBTI, and Introduction to Type are registered trademarks of Consulting 
Psychologists Press, Inc. 


Cahfornia Psychological Inventory, CPI, Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation-Behavior, and 
FIRO-B are trademarks of Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc. 


Soong Interest Inventory? of the Strong Vocational Interest Blanks®, Form 1317. Copyright © 1933, 
1968, 1974. 1981, 1994 by the Board of Trustees ol The Leland Stanford Junior University. All rights 
reserved. Strong Intcrest Inventory and Strong Vocational Interest Blanks are registered trademarks of 
Stanford University Press Printed and scored under hcense from Stanford University Press, Stanford, 
California, 94305. 


EQI is a trademark of Mulu-Tlealth Systems, Inc 

GRE is a registered trademark of Educational Testing Service (ETS). 

SAT is a registered trademark of the College Entrance Examination Board 

LSAT is a trademark of the Law School Admission Council (LSAC). 

Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. 

Millon Index of Personality Styles and MIPS are trademarks of The Psychological Corporation 


Minnesota Miltiphasic Personality Inventory and MMPI are registered trademarks of The Regents of the 
University of Minnesota. 


The NEO Personality Inventory and NEO-PI are trademarks of Psychological Assessment Resources, lnc. 


16 Personality Factors Questionnaire and 16PF are registered trademarks of Institute for Personality 
and Ability Testing, Inc 


Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale ts a registered trademark of The Psychological Corporation. 


Director of Test Publishing &amp; Inlormation Services. T. R. Prehn 
senior Project Director Peggy Alexander 

Managing Editor PUL Anderson-Wilson 
Developmental Editor. Kathleen Simon 

Copveditor Jean Schiffman 

Proofreader Pat Harris 

Indexer Shirley Manley 

Cover Art. © Linda Levin, Pacse dei Sogni, 1990 

Cover Design Big Fish 

[Interior Designer: Mark Ong, Side By Side Studios 
Director of Design &amp; Production: Laura Ackerman-Shaw 
Production. Flysia Cooke 

Manufacturing Manager Gloria Forbes 


Part | 
Chapter 1 


Chapter 2 


Part Il 


Chapter 3 


Tables ix Chapter 4 


Figures xiii 
Foreword xv 
Preface xvii 


Acknowledgments xix 


Introduction | 


Overview 3 

How to Use This Manual 4 

Differences Between the MBTI and 
Other Instruments. 4 

Overview of Psychological Type 
Theorv 5 

Identifying MBTI Preferences. 7 

Uses of the MBTI Instrument 8 

Conclusion 8 


Part Ill 


Chapter 5 


A Tradition of Change 9 
Construction of the MBTI 11 
Development of the MBTI 11 
[he 1998 Revision 13 
Conclusion. 17 


Chapter 6 


Theory 19 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 21 
A Brief History of Tvpe Theory 22 
The Four Functions. 23 
The Four Attitudes or Orientations 25 
The Theory of Type Development 27 
The Dynamic Interacuon of the 

Preferences 29 

Conclusion 33 


Contents 


Understanding the 16 Types 35 

Using Type Tables to Promote 
Understanding 36 

Idenufving Groupings of the 
Preigrences® 57 

Characteristics of Groupings of the 
Prelerences 38 

Characteristics of the 16 Types 63 

Conclusion 102 

 
Administration and 
Interpretation 103 


Administering the MBII 105 

Appropriate Populations for 
Administration. 106 

Selection of the Appropriate Form 106 
Gaining Respondent Cooperation. 107 
Introducing the MBT] 108 
Guidelines During Administration. 109 
Scoring the MBTI Form M 110 
Conclusion. 113 


Interpreting Results of the MBTI and 
Verifying Type 115 
Research Evidence Regarding Reported 
and Verified Type 116 
Introducing the Interpretation. 116 
Verifying Type 117 
Explaining Type Dynamics and 
Development 119 
Factors That Influence Accuracy of 
Sell-Report 120 
Interpreting the Preference Clarity Index 
and Preference Clarity Categories on 
the MBTI 121 
Conclusion. 123 


vi MBTI Manual 


Part IV Research 125 


Construction and Properties ol the 
MBTI 127 
Historv of the Development of Previous 
MBTI Forms 128 
Issues in the Construction ol Previous 
MBTI Forms 31 
Item Response Theory 134 
Selection of Items for Form M 139 
Development of Scoring Procedures for 
Form M 195 
Determining the Midpoint ol the Scales 
for Form M 149 
Properties of Form M 150 
The National Sample and the National 
Representative Sample 156 
Conelusion 157 


Chapter 7 


Chapter 11 


Reliability and Measurement 
Preeision 159 
Internal Consistency Reliability 
Estimates 160 
Test-Retest Reliability Estimates 162 
Measurement Preeision Using the IRT 
Method 164 
Conclusion 165 


Chapter 8 


Chapter 9 Validity 171 
Validity of the Four Preference 
Scale 
Validity of Whole Iypes and Type 
Dynamics 196 
MBTI Rescarch Resources 
Conclusion 219 


Chapter 12 


218 


Part V The Uses of Type 221 


Chapter 10 Uses of Type in Counseling and 
Psychotherapy 223 
Advantages of a Iypological Approach to 
Counseling and Psychotherapy 224 
Type and the fherapy/Counscling 
Proeéss 225 
Implications of Research on IHxealth, 
Stress, and Coping with Stress 235 
Using Type with Different Age 
Groups 239 


Using Type with Couples 240 

Using Type with Families 245 

Using Type in Treatment for Chemical 
Dependeney 246 

Summary of Clinical Research 246 

Administering and Interpreting the MBTI 
in Counseling and Psychotherapy 
Settings 249 

Conclusion 251 


Uses of Type in Education 253 
Revised by John K. DiTiberio 
Working with the 16 Types in 
Fducation 254 
Characteristics of Learners 261 
Teachers and Teacher-Learner 
Interactions. 265 
Academic Aptitude and 
Achievement 266 
Approaches to Reading, Writing, and 
Foreign Language Learning 271 
Using Type in Elementary and Secondary 
Education 276 
Using Type in Higher Education 277 
Type and Cultural Differences in 
Education 279 
Administering and Interpreting the MBTI 
in Educational Settings 280 
Conelusion 283 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 285 
Revised by Jean M. Kummerow 
Assumptions Underlying the Use of the 
MBTI in Career Counseling 286 
Work Environments 286 
Occupational Selection 293 
Job Satisfaction. 303 
Interests 307 
Values 312 
Career Decision Making 316 
Other Factors Inlluencing Career 
Counscling 317 
Four Levels of Type Interpretation in 
Career Counseling 317 
Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Career Counscling 
Settings 322 
Conclusion 324 


Contents vil 





Chapter 13 Uses of Type in Organizations 325 Chapter 14 Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 367 
Contributed by Linda K. Kirby, Contributed by Linda K. Kirby and 
Nancy J. Barger, and Roger R. Pearman Nancy J. Barger 


Introducing the MBTI and Psychological 
Type in Organizations 326 

Introducing and Using the Dynamic and 
Developmental Aspects of Type 330 

Improving Communication 332 

Dealing with Conflict 335 

Enhancing Problem Solving and 
Decision Making 339 

Planning, Implementing, and Managing 
Organizational Change 341 

Recognizing and Managing Stress 344 

Using the MBTI with Teams 348 

Using the MBTI in Leadership 
Development and Coaching 352 

Using Type in Analyzing 
Organizations 358 

Administering and Interpreting the MBTI 
in Organizations 359 

Conclusion 365 


Type and Culture 368 
Using the MBTI Personality Inventory 
in Multicultural Settings 368 
Practical Concerns About Multicultural 
Use of the MBTI 372 
Translations of the MBTI 373 
Multicultural Scoring Issues 374 
Administering and Interpreting the MBTI 
in Multicultural Settings 375 
Multicultural Type Distribution 
Samples 378 
Conclusion 384 


Appendix: Sources and Descriptions 
of Samples of the 1998 Revision 385 


Notes 387 
Glossary 389 
References 395 
Contributors 411 


Index 413 


pa ry rmt dung omen Tom. 


"n mat oe 


=&gt; A 


E c s M 


T. ^ eertlia unm ved 


GT C —— T T d ] 


^» qud 7 2022» 5$ 


melt) «int da Page ape f. (ie 


J The 


is — uides 
TOFEL T 
lw «d ect ber Tm oa 


Iå cip b. 


^u Sr? CA. 
TA 
a! 
B 


0 
qum ^y bna. 

E pas u 

i 0 b d 


= 


VES i” 


LN 7 94 "npe 


Uh. 9 


, mE 
s 
uS we 


3 y 


emm mo - o eg... 


M ms ( senii RP aa 
= l aJ CETATE 
Wh ^ e aat ^ My 
wily Spur FTH ni uro bag 
C7 aPusnanut tt ará sau 
La 709 M | Mah) Los dé A wo dad x s 





E 
f 


















4 


U! el lb a meh fil E A 
TT &gt; t eum (yn "Lr 
QT new ete UTE 
sn in - bui y 252407 
Gm Say mrt c om 
no eur cu mr TELA 
premere "79 98 
EPA Ws 2S mom 
"^5 oh ^" CHA, us 
"iler dia! upon T ar 


in (di tage UN " K i 
SUE 3 
f f 








i 
i ^ 


Chapter | 
Tante 1.1 


Chapter 2 


"wem: 2.1 


Chapter 3 


manic S] 
Tas.e 3.2 
We: E35} 


Chapter 4 


Tasit 4.1 


Tase 4.2 


Taste 4.3 


Tasic 4.4 

TABLE 4.5 

Taser 4.6 

Taste 4.7 

Tasir 4.8 

Tanie 4.9 

Taste 4.10 
Taste 3.11 
lam. 4.12 
TABLE 4.13 
Tane 4.14 
Taste 4.15 
Tase 4.16 
Tasu 4.17 
Taste 4.18 
Tagsir 4.19 
Taste 4.20 
Tague 4.21 
Tag. d 4.22 
Taste 4.23 


The Four Dichotomies of the MBTI 6 


A Summarv of Whats New and Whats Not: 
Form M_ 17 


The Eight Jungian Functions 23 
Positions of the Preferences 30 
Priorities and Direction of Functions in 
Each Type 31 


Contributions Made by Each Preference to 
Each Type 38 

Terminology for Describing Combinations 
of Preferences 39 

The Combinations of Perception and 
Judgment 41 

Research Describing ST Types 42 
Research Describing SF Types 42 
Research Describing NF Types 44 
Research Describing NT Types 45 
Research Describing I] Types +46 
Research Describing IP Types 47 
Research Describing EP Types 48 
Research Describing E] Types +9 
Research Describing SJ Types 50 
Research Describing SP Types 51 
Research Describing NP Types 51 
Research Describing NJ Types 52 
Research Describing IJ Types 53 
Research Describing IS Types 55 
Research Describing IN Types 56 
Rescarch Describing ES Types 57 
Research Deseribing EN Types 58 
Research Describing SJ Temperament 60 
Research Describing SP Temperament 61 
Research Describing NF Temperament 62 


Tapre 3.24 
Tasie 4.25 


Tasie 4.26 
TaBe 4.27 
Taste 4:28 
Tam e 4.29 
Tanir 4.30 
Tagre 4.31 
Tan 4.32 
TABLE 4.33 
Tasic 4.358 
Taste 4.35 
Tase 4.36 
TABLE 4.37 
Taste 4.38 
Tasie 3.39 
Tasir 3.40 
Tasrr 4.41 


Chapter 5 


Tasie 5.1 
TABLE 5» 
TER 


Tape 5.4 


Chapter 6 


TEED 


I«DSgrr 552 


Chapter 7 


Tagu 7.1 


Taser 7.2 
TAmr 7.3 


Tables 


Research Describing NT Temperament 63 
Characteristics Frequently Associated with 
Each Type 64 

Research Describing IST] 66 

Research Describing ISF] 69 

Research Describing ESTP 71 

Research Describing ESFP 73 

Research Describing INT] 76 

Research Describing INFJ 78 

Research Describing ENTP 80 

Research Describing ENFP 82 

Research Describing ISTP 84 

Research Describing INTP 86 

Research Describing EST] 89 

Research Describing ENTJ 92 

Research Describing ISFP 94 

Research Describing INFP 97 

Research Descnbing ESFJ 99 

Research Describing ENFJ 101 


Forms of the MBII 107 

MBTI Profiles and Reports 107 

Example of MBTI Form M Template- and 
Self-Scorable Results 111 

Converting Raw Points to Preference Clarity 
Categories 112 


Percentage of Respondents Who Agrec with 
Their Type Reports 116 

Percentage of Respondenis on Form M at 
Each Level of Preference 122 


Mcdian Item-Test Correlations for 

FormG 130 

Item Selection Criteria 139 

Comparison of Percentage of Agreement with 
Best-Fit Type for PR- and IRT-Based Scoring 
Methods 145 


iX 


TABLE 


TAg 


EARLI 7 


Tagu 


TABEI 


Tani 


Tasei 7 


TABLI 
TABLE 


TABLI 


TABLI 


Tasut 


Chapter 8 


TABLE 


TABH 


TABLI 


TABLI 


TABH 


TABLI 


TABH 


Chapter 9 


| ABLE 


Tas 


Tani 


MBTI Manual 


Ts 


us 


8.] 


5.2 


p 


DD 


DI 


9.7 


9.] 


p 


9.3 


a — — 0 ——À 


Percentage of Agreement Between Form M 
IRT-Scored Versions and Form M Template- 
and Self-Scorable Versions 146 

Results Available from Form M 148 
Percentage of Agreement Between 
Unadjusted and Adjusted Form M Iypes 

and Best-Fit Type 149 

Agreement on Number of Scales Between 
Unadjusted and Adjusted Form M and 
Best-Fit Types 150 

ltems per Scale and Item Formats for Form M 
and Form G 150 

Frequencies of Omissions on 

Form M 151] 

Relationship Between Form M and Form G in 
a Sample of Adults 152 

Item-to-Scale Correlations for Form M 153 
Intercorrelations of Continuous Scores for 
Form G and Form M 153 

Characteristics of the National Representative 
Sample 156 

Distribution of Types and Preferences for Males 
in the National Representative Sample 157 
Distribution of Types and Preferences for 
Females in the National Representative 
Sample 158 


Internal Consistency (Corrected) of Form G 
and Form M Continuous Scores Based on 
Split-Half Correlations 160 

Internal Consistency of Form M Continuous 
Scores Based on Coefficient Alpha 161 
Internal Consistency Reliability of Form M by 
Age Group and by Ethnic Group 161 
Test-Retest Correlations of Form J Continuous 
Scores over a 30-Month Period 162 
Test-Retest Correlations of Form G and Form 
M Continuous Scores 163 

Test-Retest Percentage Agreement of 
Dichotomies for Form G and Form M 163 
Percentage of People with Preterences the 
Same at Retest (Four Weeks) 164 


Correlation of MBTI Form G Preference 
Scores and the 16 Personality Factors 
Questionnaire, Fifth Edition 175 
Correlation of MBTI Form G Preference 
Scores and the Millon Index of Personality 
Styles 176 

Correlation of MBTI Form G Continuous 
Scores and the California Psychological 
Inventory, Form 434 177 





TABLI 


TABEt 


TXBET 


TABLE 


TABLI 


TABLE 


Tanti 


Taser 


TABLI 


TABLE 


TABLI 


TABLE 


TABLE 


TABLE 


TABLE 


TABLE 


TABLE 


MARIE 


TABLE 


9.4 


9.6 


9.7 


9.8 


9.9 


9.10 


9.11 


9:12 


9.13 


215 


9.15 


9.16 


9.17 


9.18 


9.19 


9.20 


Correlation of MBTI Form G Continuous 
Scores and the NEO-PI 178 

Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores and the FIRO-B 178 

Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores and the Adjective Check List 179 
Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores and the Strong Interest Inventory in 
Two Samples of College Students 180 
Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores with the Skills Confidence Inventory 
and the Careers Factors Inventory 181 
Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores and the Salience Inventory and the 
Values Seale 182 

Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores and the Work Environment 

Scalc 183 

Correlations of MBTI Form M Continuous 
Scores and the Maslach Burnout Inventory, 
the Coping Resources Inventory, and the 
State- Trait Anxiety Inventory 184 
Correlation of MBT? Continuous Scores 
(Form G) and the Jungian Iype Survcy in 
Iwo Samples 185 

t- Values and Significance Between Intervals 
for Plots Shown in Figures 9.2 and 9.3 189 
Self-Descriptions and Rater Descriptions 
Associated with MBTI Preferences 192 
Correlation of MBTI Continuous Scores 
(Form F) and the Kirton Adaption and 
Innovation Inventory in Two Samples 194 
Correlation of MBTI Continuous Scores 
(Form G) and the Time Management 
Ouestionnaire 195 

Summary of Studies of Agreement Between 
Reported and Best-Fit Types 197 

Type Dynamics Groups for Each 

Function. 199 

Summary of Significant Main Effects and 
Interactions Among the Four MBTI 
Dichotomies Against 73 Dependent 
Variables 202 

Overlap in Number of Adjectives Ascribed to 
Types Having the Dominant Versus Auxiliary 
Forms of the Thinking, Feeling, and Intuitive 
Functions in the IPAR Data 205 
Dependent Variables on Which Thinking and 
Feeling Type Dynamics Groups Dilfered 
Significantly and for Which the ANOVA 
Interaction Term Was Significant 207 
Dependent Variables on Which Sensing and 
Intuition Type Dynamics Groups Differed 
Significantly and for Which the ANOVA 
Interaction Term Was Significant 208 


il ABLE 9S 


Taste 9.24 


Taare 9.25 


TABLE 9.26 


Tasir 9.27 


Tanrr 9.28 


Tague 9.29 


Tase 9.30 


Tass 9.31 


Taste 9.32 


Chapter 10 


Tase 10.1 


IIS pr Eh. 2 


Tase 10.3 


Tang 10.4 


sui 10.5 


Tasre 10.6 


Taste 10.7 


Taere 10.8 


Tasre 10.9 


Taere 10,10 


Tamr 10.11 


Dependent Variables for Which the E-1 x 
J-P Interaction Was Significant in Thinking 
and Feeling Functions 209 

Dependent Variables for Which the E-1 x 
J-P Interaction Was Significant in Sensing 
and Intuition Functions 209 
Obliviousness Indexes for Men and 

Women 211 

Comparison of Types Most Similar to Those 
Ranked Highest in Obliviousness for Men 
and Women 212 

Comparison of Types Most Similar to Those 
Ranked Lowest in Obliviousness for Men 
and Women 212 

Differences Among the DSM Diagnoses for 
the Introverted Types 215 

Differences Among Life History Variables 
for the Introverted Types 214 

Number of “Most” and “Least” Descriptive 
Adjectives Uniquely Ascribed to Males of 
Each Type by IPAR Raters 215 

Number of "Most" and "Least" Descriptive 
Adjectives Uniquely Ascribed to Females 
of Each Type by IPAR Raters 215 
Predicted and Observed Ranks of 16 

Types by Mean Temporal Extension 

Scores 2i 


Indicative and Contraindicative Adjectives 
on the Waltz-Gough Efficacy Index 232 
Indicative and Contraindicative Q-Sort 
Items in the Marrot Psychological 
Soundness Index 233 

Rank Order of Types on Two Measures 

of Adjustment: Males 234 

Rank Order of Types on Two Measures 

of Adjustment: Females 235 

Rank Order of Types Who Answered 

"Yes" to Ever Having Heart Disease or 
Hypertension 236 

Types Reporting Highest and Lowest Mean 
Levels of Stress in Nine Categories 237 
Number of Times a Type Is Included in 
Highest and Lowest Categories 237 

Top and Bottom Ranking lypes in Methods 
of Coping with Stress 238 

Top-Ranked Types Rating “No,” “Not Sure,” 
or “Yes” Regarding Belief in a Higher 
Spiritual Power 238 

Types with Highest and Lowest Mean Scores 
on Burnout Scales 239 

Mean Scores of Highest and Lowest Types 
on Positive and Negative Affectivity 239 


Taste 10.12 
TABLE 40.13 


Tasrr 10.14 


Chapter |I 
il&amp;niEgiO] a 


TABLE LI 


Tam 11.3 
Tage 11.4 
dosBRt glade.) 


Tase 11.6 


Chapter 12 
TABLE 12.1 


There 122 
Tanie 12.3 
TABLE 12.4 


Taste 125 


Tase 12.6 


TABLE 12.7 


Taste 12.8 


Taste 12.9 
TABLE 12.10 
Tast 12.11 
TABL F 12.1 2 


TABLE, 12.13 


base 12.14 


Tables XÍ 





Mutual Usefulness of Opposite Types 241 
Attraction Ratios (AR) for Men and 
Women Married to Opposite and Like 
Types-245 

The Obliviousness Index 244 


Research on the 16 Types in Education 
Since 1985 Using Form G 256 

Research on Reports of Leisure Time 
Preferences Pertaining to Education for 
the 16 Types Using Form M 259 
Characteristics of Learners by Psychological 
Type 262 

Mean Aptitude Scores for Sensing 

and Intuition 267 

Comparisons of Ranks of the 16 Types 

by Aptitude 271 

Comparisons of the Ranks of the 16 Types 
by Grades or Class Standing 273 


Effects of Extraversion-Introversion 

in Work Situations 287 

Effects of Sensing—Intuition in Work 
Situations 287 

Effects of Thinking—Feeling in Work 
Situations 288 

Effects of Judging-Perceiving in Work 
Situations 288 

Ideal Work Environment Characteristics 
Based on Work Environment Scale 

Subscales Study 289 

*Liking" of Work Environment 
Characteristics in the National Sample 289 
The Five Most Important Work 
Environment Characteristics for Each 

Type in the National Sample 290 

The Four Types in the National Sample 
Who Most Liked Each Work Environment 
Characteristic 291 

Occupational Trends of the 16 Types 294 
Percent Overlap Between the Top 50 
Occupations for Opposite Types 295 
Percent Overlap for Types with Opposite 
Functions/Same Attitudes Versus Types with 
Same Functions/Opposite Attitudes 295 
Occupational Sample Studies 297 

Type Distribution of the National 
Representative Sample (Base Population) 298 
Working MBA Students Compared to 

the National Representative Sample 299 


xii MBTI Manual 


Tanie 12 M8 


IS Esl 281 0 
Teee IESU 
Eatyg 12.18 


Tarte 12.19 


laum | 2920 
Tagy 12:21 
Taner i222 


NE on eas 


Tagle 12.24 


Ler 12.25 
TABLI 


TABTE LIOA 
MESLE wee 


Tapa 12.29 


Tanmir 12.30 
TABLE 12.3] 
Tape 12732 
Taere 12.33 


Male Small Business Owners Sample 
Compared to Male National Representative 
Sample 299 

Female Small Business Owners Sample 
Compared to Female National Sample 300 
Male Small Business Owners Sample 
Compared to MBA Students 00 

Type Table of Librarians 301 

Sample Specialties Within the Library 
Profession and Aspects of the Job 

Enjoyed 302 

The Types Expressing the Most and Least 
Work Satisfaction and Likelihood to Leave, 
and the Highest and Lowest Income Levels 
in the National Sample 304 
Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction with Work 
Aspects in the National Sample 305 

The Greatest Dissatisfiers and Satisfiers in 
the Work Environment 306 

Confidence in Abilities, Performing, and 
Liking for the RIASEC Codes in the 
National Sample 309 

Confidence, Performanee, and Liking in 
Abilities for the Highest Ranked RIASEC 
Themes of the 16 Types in the National 
Sample 310 

Organizational Values of the 16 Types 313 
Values of the National Sample Ranked 

as "Very Important” 315 

Each Types Five Most Important Values 314 
For Each Value, the Four Types Most Often 
Endorsing “Very Important” in the National 
Sample 315 

Merging Supers Life-Span Stages with Type 
Development 319 

One ST's Career and Type Development 320 
One SF's Career and Type Development 320 
One NF’ Career and Type Development 321 
One NTs Career and Type Development 321 


Chapter 13 
Tasum 13.1 


Tag 13.2 
Tag e 1 3.3 
lanir 13.4 
Taste 13.5 
Tasit 13.6 


TABLE 13.7 
Täs 13:8 


TABus 13.9 
Tanne 13.10 
Tas] 3.11 


Taste’ 13.12 
Tan eb 


lasrw 13.14 


Chapter 14 


Tasir ed 
Taste [4.2 


Tasic 14.3 
Tanie 14.4 


Tague 14.5 


Type Distribution of Participants in the 
Center for Creative Leadership’ Leadership 
Development Program in Percentages 327 
Type Distribution of Human Resourees 
Personnel 328 

Type Distribution of Management Analysts 
and Consultants 329 

The Dominant Function of Each Type 333 
Communication Strategies and Needs: 
Signiheant Relationships with MBTI 
Preferences 335 

Behavioral Cues During 

Communication 336 

Preferred Conflict Styles of Types 339 
MBTI Function Pairs and Decision 
Making 34] 

What Eaeh Preference Needs During 
Organizational Change 342 
Thinking—Feeling During the Grieving 
Proeess 343 

Typical Work Stressors for Each of the 
Eight MBTI Preferences 345 

Ranking of Resources for Each Type 347 
Summary of Other Studies Using the Team 
as the Unit of Analysis 351 

Higher and Lower Scoring Types on the 

20 Folk Concept Scales of the CP] 354 


National Normative Samples of Adults 379 
Multicultural Type Distribution Samples 

of High School Students 380 

Multicultural Type Distribution Samples 

of University Students 381 

Selected Multicultural Database 

Samples 382 

Multicultural Type Distribution Samples 

of Managers 383 


Chapter 2 


FIGURE 


A 


Chapter 3 


FIGURE 


3.) 


Chapter 4 
Ficus 4.1 


Chapter 7 


FIGURE 


FIGURE 


FIGURE 


FIGURE 


Yd 


T2 


73 


re 


FUSED 


FIGURI 


FIGURE 


FIGURE 


Ficurt 


FIGURE 


FIGURE 


FIGURE 


1.6 


Tier 


7.8 


TES, 


"o 


7.1 


] 


Number of Articles About the MBTI 


Published by Year from 1957 to 1994 10 


The J-P Dichotomy 27 


Format of Type Tables 36 


ltem Characteristic Curves for Two 
Hypothetical Items 135 

Empirical Item Characteristic Curve for an 
E-l Item with High Discrimination 138 
Empirical Item Characteristic Curve for an 
E-] Item with Low Discrimination. 138 
Maximum Likelihood Curves for Two 
Different People 147 

E-1 Test Characteristic Curves for Men 
and Women 154 

S-N Test Charactcristic Curves lor Men 
and Women 154 

T-F Test Characteristic Curves for Men 
and Women 154 

J-P Test Characteristic Curves for Men 
and Women 154 

E-I Test Characteristic Curves for Older 
and Younger Respondents 155 

S-N Test Characteristic Curves for Older 
and Younger Respondents 155 

T-F Test Characteristic Curves for Older 
and Younger Respondents 155 


7.12 J-P Test Characteristic Curves for Older 


and Younger Respondents 155 


Chapter 8 
Ficunr 8.1 


Ficure 8.2 
Ficure 8.3 


Ficure 8.4 


Chapter 9 
Ficure 9.1 


Figure 9.2 


Ficunr 9.3 


Ficure 9.4 


Figure 9.5 


Chapter 10 


Figures 


E-I Test Information and TSE Functions for 
Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 166 
S-N Test Information and TSE Functions for 
Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools. 167 
T-F Test Information and TSE Functions for 
Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 168 
J-P Test Information and TSE Functions for 
Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 169 


Mean Aptitude Scores at Different Levels 

of Preference Scores for Each of the 
Dichotomies 186 

Proportion of Engineering Students Who 
Reported Different Levels of Prelerence on the 
I-F Dichotomy 187 

Faculty Ratings of Gregariousness in Students 
Who Reported Different Levels of Preference 
on the E-I Dichotomy 188 

Reported Books Read per Year as a Function of 
Sensing and Intuition Preference Scores 189 
Evoked Potential Analysis for Extraverted 

and Introverted Students 190 


Ficure 10.) Mean Ratings of Satisfaction with Intimate, 


Chapter I | 


Friendship, and Family Relationships for the 
16 Types 245 


Ficure 11.1 Comparison of Intelligence and Grades ol 


Ficure 11.2 


the 16 Types in High School 269 
Comparison of Aptitude and Achievement 
of the 16 Types in Liberal Arts 269 


xlii 


xiv MBTI Manual 


Ficure 11.3 Premedical Point-Hour Ratio Compared 
with the National Board Average at the End 
of Phase II of Medical School 270 

Ficure 11.4. Clinical Ratings for Medical Expertise 
Compared with Clinical Ratings for 
Enthusiastic Involvement in Medical 
Schools 270 


Chapter 12 


Ficure 12.1 Hollands Vocational Types and Brief 
Definitions 308 


Ficure 12.2 MBTI Preferences and Function Pair 
Differences Associated with RIASEC General 
Occupational Themes (GOT) and Skills 
Confidence Inventory (SCI) in a Sample of 
College Students 311 


Chapter 14 


Ficure 14.1 Three Levels of Uniqueness in Human Mental 
Programming 368 


he revision of the MBTI Manual: A Guide to the Devel- 

opment and Use of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator has 

been driven by a carefully formulated mission state- 
ment and philosophy. This has been true of all work in the 
research, development, and application of the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator carried out under the auspices of Consulting 
Psychologists Press. The philosophy embodies a combination 
of tradition and change. 

The value of tradition and the commitment to change 
are based on the vision, mission, and goals of Katharine 
Cook Briggs and her daughter, Isabel Briggs Myers, in their 
collaboration to create an instrument to identify Jungian 
personality type. 

The shared vision of Katharine Briggs and Isabel Myers 
was “to enable individuals to grow through an understand- 
ing and appreciation of individual differences in healthy per- 
sonality and to enhance harmony and productivity among 
diverse groups." Briggs and Myers believed that Car! Jungs 
understanding of human development, his theoretical model 
encompassing psychological type, his concept of the process 
of individuation, and his structure of the psyche offered the 
most promising approach. Their mission was to give the 
individual access to the benefits of this understanding. 

In following this tradition we have placed special empha- 
sis on holding to the spirit of Jung, Briggs, and Myers in their 
never-ending quest for deeper understanding of emerging 
ideas, the possibilities of new and untried methods, and the 


Foreword 


insights of expanding knowledge—thus our commitment to 
a "tradition of change." The development of both the instr- 
ment and the theory should be viewed as an ongoing process. 

This ongoing process is richly illustrated in the MBTI 
Manual. Since the death of Isabel Myers in 1980, much has 
been learned from a large body of new research, from the 
experience of thousands of practitioners, from developments 
in effective feedback, and trom refinements in Jungian theory 
coupled with insights from complementary theories. In addi- 
tion, new technology and psychometric methodology have 
made significant contributions. 

For those of us who remember Isabel Myers working in 
relative isolation from early in the morning until late at night 
for nearly four decades, the phenomenon of the large group 
of talented, knowledgeable people who worked together on 
this manual and the new Form M seems awesome and won- 
drous. It has been an exciting project for those involved; the 
authors, editors, coordinators, and production team. We are 
proud of the fine collaborative spirit displayed throughout 
and the wonderful relationships that have developed. For 
many years, Isabel Myers was the primary researcher. This 
manual pulls together the work of hundreds of researchers 
and practitioners. We are indebted to each of them. 


Katharine Downing Myers 
Peter Briggs Myers 
June 1998 


XV 





aay ut SLT on CUOR- B = "25 4 whi p* i 2s vetu 


"nns a 21g NA Md a. \ wile D 5 
gv demus A die diene «ng EIo 
MD ese W lmn Weva Dy amy? nT S A TEY 


hisa- pi) ii mf 
IT ia) ee 
— &gt; sinam 
“= fügt ic drá Sutra do alert omi ud p te t 
et wines me Tw pi Peg QI TP 
Vleet AARIA zs Crinly 


3T ei'apd = y 203 Tio PI T E 
B us! e^ $ ELE &gt; a pt » i nit. 


u^ vei AI. cw 9 ins M 


"he (EGER uet iuh 
f PETEN E Ti 
M ait; hw err ie. eV 
tute w «à tein OY os oda 
fitta aped ots): wn brah EU Ps 
AA leg d Peso emm bim gba td edi onte 


i105 d op 
4t ia Pn jay « 
' » ow = (C 


dA ape Pei ec 


"i^v fone domos erm Mov? ws rbtwustautM 

Q1 feos at ud tO UR utr fo. eA un? ba, 
1 ii. x Drg biis ae EXT id e 
be Gunes ww kali Moe fun | aub tll 0 vs Pens c 
“es Meier sea ó4* mltan Uu rmv al de 


el J Sah ip € E ymn m "S E b aĝ i CGTk u ^ K em. Mes 
PTS L424 4 d. (apes 


nettes. fagtin, pte 9 teneat De 


"e, ab entend lo Pais avi idu 


elo unire &gt; 7; 3i p 
et P gn Ad 3'1 


ODD: dra 


























wee ie diuo diene laa Un 
gt dm Sales A EPIS 


1900 Ete ais int 
a^ ài tee yee md odd DUCI «tia 
ovt alt e orca lp n ol 
puipiycs 0 arte wir (s i 
atii v titi ee 





d 





per (tnbus =i int "di 
MEND ia Ray, re win Mtt 


ED E Lu cella Am 
ét qup nou "— — 


‘aie ie Macho nde 

func dun ra pie = T: b Mà ah 
mis di 

ficia 


100 Gl pee oP 


wea «A Os LT E 
rut opm niin 

oct e" 
d. i e cd 


aghast Sale ab d 
reper 








ro yn 5/1 jus tps oM 
at'&gt; mpi) of pg stt Soe 
unt cuo u OT 
pni creer wdath à vy 
mpar lje feug Seu wui4 -— 
ifft e cgay! tem cpm xt feogage 
amars lo unti mr o "— 
vti loi. roti desunt wid a d 


5 E 
LJ 


fps 


est manuals are revised periodically in order to give 

users access to new knowledge that has accumulated 

from research and practitioner experience. This pur- 
pose, together with the introduction of Form M of the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator?, was central to the develop- 
ment of this new edition of the MBTI® Manual. A second, 
even more powerful, objective of this revision was to rein- 
force the connection of the MBTI to its roots in the psycho- 
logical type theorv of Carl G. Jung. 

One consequence of the popularity of the MBTI is that it 
has become increasingly detached from psychological type 
theory—often to the detriment of the individuals whom it 
is intended to benefit. Reconnecting the MBTI to type the- 
ory has critical practical implications and applications. In 
this regard, the overall goal of this edition is identical to 
that of the two editions that preceded it, and indeed to that 
of the Indicator itself: to make the theory of psychological 
types described by Jung understandable and useful in peo- 
ples lives. 

In this edition the registered trademark notation appears 
and the MBTI is described as a “personality inventory.” 
These additions are not without significance. The trade- 
mark addresses a second consequence of popularity—the 
need to ensure that the origins and ownership of the MBTI 
are acknowledged and protected. Specifying that the MBTI 
is a personality inventory rather than some other kind of 
assessment tool discourages its misuse as a test of skills or 
abilities or as a simple measure of a particular construct, 
such as “cognitive styles.” Such possible misunderstanding 
is just one problematic result of detaching the instrument 
from its theoretical roots. An associated and far more seri- 
ous issue is mistaking the MBTI for a personality trait mea- 
sure rather than a dynamic typology. Readers will find many 
references to and clarifications of this issue in the chapters 
making up all five parts of the manual. 

As the essential reference for users of the MBTI, the man- 
ual is organized with the goal of promoting maximum under- 
standing and ease of application. Part I, “Introduction,” gives 





Preface 


a broad overview of the distinctive features of the MBTI and 
its basis in Jungs type theory, details the 50-year develop- 
ment of the instrument, and explores the rationale and pur- 
poses behind the development of the new standard Form M. 
Part II, “Theory,” explains Jungs dynamic theory of type and 
the ways in which Myers and Briggs extended and clarified 
it when they created their instrument. Combinations of 
preferences and the 16 types are described and research evi- 
dence is summarized to help make the dynamic core of psy- 
chological type accessible and meaningful to users. Part IH, 
"Administration and Interpretation," gives practitioners the 
basic information necessary to use the MBTI effectively and 
offers practical insights into issues that influence these two 
critical arcas. Part IV, “Research,” covers the wealth of infor- 
mation relevant to the psychometric features of the MBTI 
with regard to its construction, reliability, and validity. It 
describes the new method of selecting items for and scoring 
Form M through item response theory (IRT) and contrasts it 
with the prediction ratio method used for previous forms of 
the Indicator. The focus on type dynamics and whole types 
that permeates Parts I through IV culminates in Part V, “The 
Uses of Type," which provides hands-on, practical guidance 
to those using the MBTI in counseling and psychotherapy, 
education, career counscling, organizations, multicultural 
settings, and, by extension, other applications yet to be dis- 
covered. 

In the first (1962) manual, Isabel Myers acknowledged 
her mother, Katharine C. Briggs, coauthor of the MBTI, for 
her original theory of type that predated her discovery of 


Jungs theory, for “her penetrating analysis of the part 


played by the judgment-perception preference in her struc- 
ture of Jungian types, and for her indispensable collabora- 
tion in the writing of the Type Indicator and support in its 
development." In the acknowledgments to the 1985 Man- 
ual, Mary McCaulley commented, “The influence of Isabel 
Mvers permeates this volume. Some sections of this mannal 
were written by her. In other sections, her ideas are sum- 
marized, using written records supplemented by notes of 


xvii 


xviii 


MBTI Manual 


hundreds of hours of discussions over the decade the two 
authors worked together. . . . This work reflects Myers’ six 
decades of interest in Jungs theory of psychological types 
and four decades of research to devclop a way of putting 
Jungs theory to practical use." 

When Isabel Myers died in 1980, Mary McCaulley took 
on the immense revision task that culminated in the 1985 
Manual. Her extensive knowledge of the MBTI and her 
commitment to Myers' vision of a world able to make *con- 
structive usc of differences" enabled her to produce an out- 
standing work almost singlehandedly. tt covered all the pro- 
fcssional requirements for a psychological test manual with 
grcat clarity and precision. It was unique, however, in being 
accessible to both the professional psychologists for whom 
it was intended and laypeople who had little or no psycho- 
logical training. As such, the 1985 Manual was the training 
vchicle for thousands of professionals now using the Mvers- 
Briges Type Indicator 

The goal of addressing the needs of both psychological 
professionals and the variety of professionals in other fields 
who usc the Indicator was central to the writing of every 


chapter in this manual. To further address this need, a com- 
prehensive glossary of terms appears at the end of the man- 
ual. The Glossary covers all relevant terms that appear in 
the manual, including guidelines for using terminology ina 
consistent and accurate manner. Also included are items 
that are not referred to explicitly in the manual, but that are 
relevant and uscful to professionals interested in the MBTI, 
such as Isabel Briggs Mycrs Memorial Library and CAPT- 
MBTI Data Bank. To accommodate users in other countries, 
the glossary includes definitions of such terms as grade 
point average and middle school. 

This 1998 revision of Isabel Briggs Myers’ monumental 
lifes work both celebrates the centennial of her birth and 
moves her accomplishments into the twenty-first century. It 
is our hope that it will bring us closer to Myers' vision of a 
world in which Jungs theory of type promotes, through the 
MBTI, the constructive use of differences. 


Naomi L. Quenk 
Allen L. Hammer 
June 1998 


n producing this revision, no single author could have 

hoped to duplicate Mary McCaulley’s (1985) accom- 

plishment. The depth and especially the breadth of 
knowledge about the MBTI and its applications that are 
necessary 13 years later are beyond the seope of one person. 
Thus the volume reflects major efforts from a number of 
people who either revised existing chapters or wrote new 
ones. All contributed within the tradition established by 
Myers and McCaulley, and they made every effort to retain 
the original language wherever possible. 

Martha Wilson Alcock, R. J. Harvey, and Wayne D. 
Mitchell contributed significantly to the chapters in Part IV. 
Martha Wilson Alcock provided expertise in the area of 
brain functioning in relation to type, R. J. Harvey con- 
tributed his knowledge and research methods in using item 
response theory in the construction and analysis of Form 
M, and Wayne Mitchell contributed his research and inter- 
pretation of studies on type dynamics and whole type. 

A number of individuals either revised chapters exten- 
sively or created new chapters for Part V. All authors 
accomplished the daunting task of distilling vast amounts 
of information into a form that would be clear, accessible, 
and usable by practitioners. Chapter 10 was revised by 
Naomi Quenk, Chapter 11 was revised by John DiTiberio, 
Chapter 12 was revised by Jean Kummerow, Chapter 13 
was contributed by Linda Kirby, Nancy Barger, and Roger 
Pearman, and Chapter 14 was contributed by Linda Kirby 
and Nancy Barger. 

Many members of the type community generously vol- 
unteered their time and expertise in critiquing selected 
parts of the manuscript. Their individual and combined 
contributions have considerably strengthened the work. 
Peter B. Myers, Isabel Myers’ son, and Katharine D. Myers, 
her daughter-in-law, carefully reviewed the entire manu- 
script as it was being written. They provided invaluable 


Acknowledgments 


information and insights that ensure that the legacy of 
Isabel Myers has been preserved. 

The manual could never have been completed without 
the dedicated and unstinting efforts of the many individual 
members of the CPP manual team. Tom Prehn, Director of 
Test Publishing and Information Services, successfully bal- 
anced the enormous time-and-effort requirements of thc 
revision process within the larger context of CPP’s publish- 
ing commitments. Peggy Alexander, Senior Project Direc- 
tor, accomplished the daunting task of coordinating the 
many interdependent and intersecting elements of the revi- 
sion process. Kathleen Simon, Developmental Editor, both 
provided substantive content editing at the larger organiza- 
tional level and kept close watch over matters of clarity and 
specificity of language. Jill Anderson-Wilson, Managing 
Editor, used her depth of understanding and meticulous 
attention to detail to help hone the final edited text. Laura 
Ackerman-Shaw, Director of Design and Production, in 
addition to executing an outstanding design, exerted super- 
human efforts in keeping everyone and everything ou track. 
Superior proofreading was provided by Pat Harris, ably 
assisted by Karen Stough and Stacey Lynn. Jean Schiffman, 
copy editor, and Shirley Manley, indexer, masters of their 
respective crafts, went out of their way to accommodate the 
ever-changing schedule that was inevitable in a work of this 
complexity. Consulting editor Anne Scanlan-Rohrer was 
responsible for coordinating the many tables. Cici Arabian, 
Editorial Assistant, cheerfully and efficiently managed all of 
the many details associated with permissions, captions, ref- 
erences, and other elements. Elysia Cooke, graphic artist, 
worked feverishly to lay out the pages, input the hundreds 
of changes made to the manuscript and galleys, and bring 
the production process to completion. Gloria Forbes and 
Jennifer Cass, both in Manufacturing, ensured that the 
printed and bound book became a reality. 


xix 


XE MBTI Manual 





Judy Chartrand, Research Scientist, was responsible for 
analyzing the massive amounts of data collected on the 
national sample and other related research efforts, and for 
completing all analyses within very tight time constraints. 
She was assisted by Mark Majors, who was both flexible 
and thorough in the many analysis projects he undertook. 
Charles Junn, Research Associate, efficiently and conscien- 
tiously coordinated and managed all the data used in the 
analyses. These data were collected by a number of people 


who generously volunteered their time and effort. Among 
them are Barb Krantz, Kevin Nutter, Dennis Gailbreath, 
Jane Tibbs, Ron Seel, Gina Zanardelli, Karen Salazar, Roger 
Pearman, Jesse Holschbach, and the staff of Trinity Lu- 
theran Church. 

Each of the individuals who participated in the many 
aspects of the revision demonstrated dedication, energy, 
and commitment to the goal that is now realized in this new 
edition of the manual. 


[ 


roduction 


he two chapters in Part I provide a broad yet sulfi- 

ciently detailed overview of the manual so that 
readers will have both an accurate anticipation of the 
material that follows and a practical grasp of its 
usefulness. 


Chapter 1, “Overview,” covers all of the features of the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator? (MBTI®) that are critical for 
understanding its position as a theory-based instrument 
and how it differs from other personality instruments. The 
chapter succinctly encapsulates much of the material that 
follows in the remaining chapters, giving readers a useful 
preview of what is to come. As you read Chapter 1, you 
will become aware of the following: 


mg The MBTI identifies preferences rather than competencies. 

gm The eight characteristics that are defined in the MBTI 
are not traits that vary in quantity; they are dichoto- 
mous constructs that deseribe equally legitimate but 
opposite ways in which we use our minds. 

m Ihe MBTI describes a dynamic personality system such 
that the 16 types are greater than the sum of their parts. 

g The dynamic and developmental approach of the MBTI 
involves the interplay of the dominant, auxiliary, ter- 
tiary, and inferior functions that were specified by Jung. 

gm The new standard Form M uses a different statistical 
method for scoring from the one used in earlier forms. 

m There are five major fields in which the MBTI is cur- 
rently being used. 


2 Introduction 





Chapter 2, “A Tradition of Change,” focuses on the essen- 
tial features of the MBTI as an implementation of Jungs the- 
ory. The chapter describes the 50-year development of the 
Indicator, the rigorous requirements in the construction of its 
various forms, and the factors that led to the new standard 
Form M, with its revised items and new scoring method. As 
you read Chapter 2, you will become aware of the following: 


m ltem selection—that is, deleting, revising, and adding 
items to Form M of the Indicator—was based on both 
theoretical and empirical criteria. 

m Separate scoring keys for males and females on the 
Thinking-Feeling dichotomy are no longer needed. 


m Ihe 1998 revision adhered firmly to Myers’ focus on 
types rather than traits and on normal, adaptive behavior 
rather than pathology. 

g A national random sample was used to revise the MBTI. 


People who are new to type will find many terms in 
these two chapters that are either unfamiliar or defined in 
different and special ways. People familiar with type will 
also find some new words. All of these important words 
and terms are explained and clarified in the Glossary at the 
end of the manual. 


How to UseThis Manual 


Differences Between the MBTI 
and Other Instruments 


Overview of Psychological 
Type Theory 


Identifying MBTI Preferences 
Uses of the MBTI Instrument 


Conclusion 


Overview 


he purpose of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) 

personality inventory is to make the theory of psy- 
chological types described by C. G. Jung (1921/1971) 
understandable and useful in seonles lives. The essenee of 
the theory is that mueh seemingly random variation in 
behavior is actually quite orderly and consistent, being due 
to basie differences in the way individuals prefer to use their 
pereeption and judgment. 


Pereeption involves all the ways of becoming aware of 
things, people, happenings, or ideas. Judgment involves all 
the ways of coming to conclusions about what has been 
perceived. If people differ systematically in what they per- 
ceive and in how they reach conclusions, then it is only rea- 
sonable for them to differ correspondingly in their interests, 
reactions, values, motivations, and skills. 

In developing the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, the aim of 
Isabel Briggs Myers and her mother, Katharine Briggs, was 
to make the insights of type theory accessible to individuals 
and groups. They addressed two related goals in the devel- 
opment and application of the MBTT instrument: 


l. The identification of basic preferences on each of 
the four dichotomies specified or implicit in Jung's 
theory. The MDTI personality inventory (also re- 
ferred to as “the Indicator”) is based on Jungs ideas 
about how different ways ot perceiving and judging, 
in combination with different attitudes, describe dit- 
ferent types of people. Perception and judgment are 
conceived of as mental functions; the term attitudes 
refers to orientation of energy and orientation to the 


4 Introduction 





external world. Personality types result from inter- 
actions among the four MBTI dichotomies. These 
dichotomies encompass four opposite domains of 
mental functioning: opposite ways of percciving, oppo- 
site ways of judging, opposite attitudes in which pre- 
ferred perception and preferred judgment are typi- 
cally used, and opposite ways of relating to the world. 

. The identification and description of the 16 distinc- 
tive personality types that result from interactions 
among the preferences. A type is not created by sim- 
ply adding the four preferred ways of functioning. 
Each type described by Jung and Myers is greater than 
the sum of its parts because of the different interac- 
tions among the four preferences that make up a type. 
By identifying the preferences, the combinations of 
preferences, and how the combined preferences oper- 
ate as whole dynamice types, researchers can establish 
effects and put them to practical use. 


n 


Because the MBTI is based on a theory and beca.i;s^ 
the variety of ways in which it has been applied, this man- 
ual has four equally important goals: 


B To provide users with an adequate understanding of psy- 
chological type theory 

B To explain the psychometric properties of the instru- 
ment that are a direct consequence of the theory upon 
which it is based, which requires the identification of 
qualitatively different types rather than the more com- 
monly measured universal traits 

B To present the research that demonstrates the reliability, 
validity, and psychometric soundness of the instrument 

E To serve as an essential handbook for using the MBTI in 
a wide variety of settings 


The goal of this chapter is to provide readers with the 
orientation needed to make máximum use of the remaining 
chapters. The chapter therefore covers the intended uses of 
the manual, a general overview of Jungs psychological type 
theory, issues in identifying MBTI preferences, and the var- 
ied uses of the MBTI. 


How to Use This Manual 


This third edition of The MBTI Manual: A Guide to the Devel- 
opment and Use of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator is a revision 
of the 1985 edition and covers information relevant to 
understanding and using type as obtained from the new 
standard Form M, which replaces Form G. Extended forms 
of the Indicator (Forms J and K) that give respondents indi- 
vidualized type results on component parts of cach type 
dichotomy have been published. Separate manuals are avail- 
able for these extended forms of the MBTI (Mitchell, in 
press; Saunders, 1987, 1989). 


Y 


Readers of this manual who are new to the MBTI instru- 
ment will want to pay careful attention to the sections on 
Jungs theory and the modifications of the theory con- 
tributed by Myers and Briggs (Chapters 3 and 4). Experi- 
enced users of the Indicator will be particularly interested 
in the sections that describe why the MBTI was revised 
(Chapter 2) and how the revision relates to the construc- 
tion and properties (Chapter 7) and the reliability and 
validity (Chapters 8 and 9) of the MBTI. 

Both new and seasoned MBTI practitioners will benefit 
from a careful review of the theoretical and psychometric 
differences between the MBTI and other personality instru- 
ments. Chapters 3 and + provide the theoretical foundation 
for the Indicator, and Chapter 7 its essential psychometric 
features. In addition, theoretical and psychometric differ- 
ences between the MBTI and other instruments have 
important implications for both the administration of the 
instrument (Chapter 5) and its interpretation to clients 
(Chapter 6). Familiarity with all of these differences will 
ensure effective use of the instrument with clients in all 
areas in which the MBTI is appropriately applied. In addi- 
tion, researchers will profit from the detailed explanation of 
the distinctive psychometrie features (Chapters 7, 8, and 9) 
of the Indicator, as this will enable them to use the most 
appropriate research designs and data analysis techniques. 
The varied ways in which the Indicator is effectively applied 
appear in Chapters 10 through 14. These chapters give 
detailed information about the way the MBTI has been used 
in each application setting and a summary of relevant 
research. 

As compared with previous editions, the emphasis 
throughout this edition of the manual is on the dynamic 
character of whole, four-letter types with correspondingly 
less attention given to evidence concerning the preferences 
that make up single dichotomies. This emphasis character- 
izes all or most of the chapters that cover theoretical con- 
siderations, psychometric analyses, and research on appli- 
cations in the many areas relevant to type. 


Differences Between the MBTI 
and Other Instruments 


The MBTI differs from most other personality instruments 
in that the theory upon which it is based postulates 
dichotomies. These dichotomies are believed to reflect 
innate psychological or mental dispositions. The require- 
ment that the instrument reflect these dichotomies has 
been a major factor in the design of items, use of numerical 
information to determine type preferences, general psycho- 
metric properties, and interpretation of results of the MBTI. 
The following points summarize the instruments important 
distinguishing features. 


m The MBTI is different from typical trait approaches to 


personality that measure variation along a continuum; 
instead, the Indicator seeks to identify a respondents 
status on either one or the other of two opposite personal- 
ity categories, both of which are regarded as neutral in 
relation to emotional health, intellectual functioning, 
and psychological adaptation. Each of the categories 
specified in the instrument represents a multifaceted 
domain of psychological functioning. The assumption is 
that one of each pair of categories is inherently more 
appealing than the other to a particular respondent. Thus 
the forced-choice format of items is designed to reveal a 
preference between equally viable mental processes and 
attitudes. In contrast, trait-based instruments typically 
define a dimension or scale as a single trait. 

The type-trait distinction leads to quite different mean- 
ings for the scores of trait instruments and MBTI prefer- 
ence clarity indexes. For example, a person with a high 
score on the Extraversion scale of the NEO Personality 
Inventory " (NEO-PI™), a trait instrument (Costa &amp; 
McCrae, 1985), is seen as having more Extraversion than 
a person with a low score on that scale, and a person with 
a low score on the scale may be viewed as having a deficit 
of the identified personality trait of Extraversion. In con- 
trast, MBT} preference clarity indexes indicate how 
clearly a respondent prelers one of two opposite poles of 
a dichotomy, not how much of that pole she or he has. 
Each preference in a pair is a construct with its own legit- 
imate content that is separate and distinct from the con- 
tent of the opposite preference. Opposite preferences are 
not adequately described by using one or the other as the 
definitive criterion. For example, Introversion is not 
described as a lack of Extraversion, nor is Extraversion 
seen as a deficit in Introversion. 

Because the requirement is to sort individuals into 
opposite categories rather than to measure an amount or 
degree of a trait as is done in trait-based instruments, 
the numerical preference clarity index on the MBTI 
reflects the degree of confidence in the accuracy of place- 
ment of a respondent into a particular type category. Chap- 
ter 6 provides guidelines for estimating degrees of conh- 
dence in category placements. 

As a self-reported indicator of complex underlying psy- 
chological processes, preference clarity indexes associ- 
ated with MBTI type categories are properly viewed as 
trustworthy indications of the accuracy of an individ- 
uals results. However, the focus of the MBTI is on its 
usefulness to respondents. Therefore, verification of the 
accuracy ol the indicated type by the respondent is essen- 
tial. MBTI results do not “tell” a person who she or he 
is. Rather, individual respondenis are viewed as experts 
who are best qualified 10 judge the accuracy of the type 
descriptions that result from their self-report. Chapter 6 
covers recommended techniques and procedures for 
helping clients assess the accuracy of their reported 
MBTI type and identily the type that best fits them. 


Overview 5 


w Based on the theory, there are specific dynamic relation- 
ships among the four preferences (Extraversion or 
Introversion, Sensing or Intuition, Thinking or Fecling, 
Judging or Perceiving) that lead to the descriptions and 
characteristics of the 16 personality types. Further, 
although the four dichotomies identified by the MBTI 
are psychometrically independent of each other, the 
dynamic characteristics of each type are not reflected in 
a simple summation of an individual's four preferences. 
Rather, each of ihe 16 types results from a specilied 
interaction that is consistent with the Jung and Myers 
theory. Understanding these dynamic interactions aids 
the interpretation and verification process and provides 
critical information for applications and research. 

m The type descriptions are designed to reflect a theory that 
includes a model of devclopment that continues through- 
out the lifespan. As a result, specific hypotheses relevant 
to different ages and stages of life can be made and tested 
empirically. For example, the theory predicis thai 
younger persons are generally less clear and consistent in 
their preferences than are mature individuals. As a result, 
we expect lower reliability coefficients when testing sam- 
ples of young people and higher reliabilities with older 
subjects. This hypothesis is clearly confirmed in a num- 
ber of samples in the 1985 Manual, although sufficiently 
large samples of young people are not yet available on 
Form M to allow for a definite conclusion. In coming to 
conclusions about the reliability of the Indicator, there- 
fore, it is important to recognize that samples that include 
a wide range of ages will demonstrate lower reliabilities 
than samples limited to mature, well-functioning adults. 
Whereas such a result helps validate the developmental 
aspect of the theory, failure to recognize the basis for dif- 
ferential reliabilities can lead to an erroneous conclusion 
regarding the overall reliability of the instrument. 

m The MBTI dichotomies are concerned with basic attitudes 
and mental functions that enter into almost every aspect of 
behavior; therefore the scope of practical applications is 
broad rather than narrow and includes quite varied aspects 
of living. This is evident in the number of different applica- 
tions covered in Part V of this manual, “The Uses ol Type.” 


Overview of Psychological 
Type Theory 


Type theory as used in this manual relers to Jungs theory as 
interpreted by Isabel Myers and Katharine Briggs in the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator personality inventory. The 
dynamic character specified by type theory involves the 
interaction of a persons four basic preferences. This section 
describes thc opposites that make up each dichotomy and 
the 16 types that result from interactions among the four 
preferences. 


6 Introduction 


The Four Preferences That Make Up a Type 


The MBTI instrument identifies four separate dichotomies: 
Extraversion versus Introversion, Sensing versus Intuition, 
Thinking versus Feeling, and Judging versus Perceiving. An 
individual is assumed to have a preference for one of each 
pair of opposites over the other. The four preferences direct 
the characteristic use of perception and judgment by an 
individual. The particular preferences that interact in a per- 
son affect not only what is attended to in any given situation 
but also how conclusions arc drawn about what has been 
perceived. The four dichotomies of the MBTI are described 
in the following sections and are outlined in Table 1.1. The 
MBTI classifies the first and fourth dichotomies listed as atti- 
tudes or orientations and the middle two dichotomies as 
functions or processes. Attitude and orientation are used 
interchangeably throughout this manual, as are function 
and process. 


The Four Dichotomies 
of the MBTI 


Extraversion-Introversion Dichotomy 
(attitudes or orientations of energy) 


Table 1.1! 


Extraversion (E) Introversion (I) 


Directing energy mainly toward 
the inner world of experiences 


Directing energy mainly toward 
the outer world of people and 


objects and ideas 
Sensing-Intuition Dichotomy 
(functions or processes of perception) 
Sensing (S) Intuition (IN) 


Focusing mainly on perceiving 
patterns and interrelationships 


Focusing mainly on what can be 
perceived by the five senses 





Thinking-Feeling Dichotomy 
(functions or processes of judging) 
Thinking (T) Feeling (F) 
Basing conclusions on logical 


analysis with a focus on 
objectivity and detachment 


Basing conclusions on personal 
or social values with a focus on 
understanding and harmony 





Judging-Perceiving Dichotomy 
(attitudes or orientations toward 
dealing with the outside world) 


Judging (J) 


Preferring the decisiveness and 
closure that result from dealing 
with the outer world using one 
of the Judging processes 
(Thinking or Feeling) 


Perceiving (P) 


Preferring the flexibility and 
spontaneity that results from 
dealing with the outer world 
using one of the Perceiving 
processes (Sensing or Intuition) 


Extraversion or Introversion (E-I) The E-l dichotomy is 
designed to reflect whether a person prefers Extraversion or 
Introversion in the sense intended by Jung (1921/1971). 
Extraverts arc oriented primarily toward the outer world; 
thus they tend to focus their energy on people and objects. 
Introverts are oriented primarily toward the inner world; 
thus they tend to focus their energy on concepts, ideas, and 
internal experiences. Jung regarded Extraversion and 
Introversion as “mutually complementary” attitudes whose 
differences “generate the tension that both the individual and 
socicty need for the maintenance of life” (p. 160). Jung thus 
saw both Extraversion and Introversion as necessary for 
psychological adaptation. 


Sensing or Intuition (S-N)! The S-N dichotomy is de- 
signed to reflect a persons preference between two opposite 


ways of percciving. À person may rely primarily upon the 
process of Sensing (S), which attends to observable facts or 
happenings through one or more of the five senses, or a 
person may rely more upon the less obvious process of 
Intuition (N), which attends to meanings, relationships, 
and/or possibilities that have been worked out beyond the 
reach of the conscious mind. 


Thinking or Feeling (T—F) The T-F dichotomy is designed 


to reflect a persons preference between two contrasting 
ways of making a judgment. A person may rely primarily on 
Thinking (T) to decide impersonally on the basis of logical 
consequences, or a person may rely primarily on Feeling 
(F) to decide primarily on the basis of personal or social 
values. In Jungs and Myers’ approaches, the term Thinking 
does not imply intelligence or competence, and the term 
Feeling is not to be confused with emotional. Intelligence 
and emotional expression are independent of psychological 


typology. 


Judging or Perceiving (J—P) The J-P dichotomy is designed 
to identify the process a person tends to use in dealing with 


the outer world, that is, with the extraverted part of life. A 
person who prefers using a Judging (J) process typically 
uses cither Thinking or Feeling (the Judging processes) 
when dealing with the outer world. A person who preters a 
Perceiving (P) process reports a preference for using either 
Sensing or Intuition (the perceiving processes) when 
dealing with the outer world. lt should be noted that Myers 
and Briggs believed this dichotomy was implicit in Jungs 
theory, but it was not explicitly described in Jungs writings. 
Chapter 3 elucidates Briggs and Myers’ extension of type 
theory in this regard. 


It is important to note that a preference for one alterna- 
tive of each dichotomy docs not mean that the opposite, 
less-preferred alternative is never used. Both the theory and 
practical observations describe individuals as using cach of 


the eight preference categories at least some of the timc. 
Thus a person who typically uses Thinking (T) when 
extraverting—a person with a Judging (J ) attitude—imay at 
times extravert the preferred or even less-preferred Perceiv- 
ing (P) process, even though such an approach may not be 
typical lor the person. 





The l6 Types 


According to theory, each of the 16 types results from a 
preference for one pole of cach of the four dichotomies over 
the opposite pole. A preference on any onc dichotomy is 
designed to be psychometrically independent of the prefer- 
ences on the other three dichotomies.^ Therefore, prefer- 
ences on the four dichotomies yield 16 possible combina- 
tions called types, which are denoted by the four letters 
identifying the poles preferred (e.g., ESTJ, INFP). 

The theorv postulates specific dynamic relationships 
among the preferences. For each type, one process is the 
leading, or dominant, process and a second process serves as 
an auxiliary process that provides balance in the personal- 
ity. Each type has its own pattern of dominant and auxiliary 
processes and the attitudes (E or 1) in which these are habit- 
ually used. Determining these dynamic relationships is 
enabled by the J-P dichotomy of the MBTI and is fully 
explained in Chapter 3. The distinctive characteristics of 
each type follow from the dynamic interplay of processes 
and attitudes. 

In terms of the theory, people may reasonably be 
expected to develop greater comfort and facility with the 
processes they preler to use and with the attitudes in 
which they prefer to use them. For example, if they prefer 
the Extraverted (E) attitude, they are likely to be more 
confident and effective in dealing with the outer world 
than with the Introverted (1) world of concepts, ideas, and 
inner expcriences. If they prefer the perceiving process of 
Sensing (S), they are likely to be more confident and effec- 
tive in dealing with facts and realities than in dealing with 
theories and possibilities, which are in the sphere of Intu- 
ition (N). H they prefer the judgment process o! Thinking 
(T), they are likely to rely more heavily on objective 
Thinking judgments than on the values that underlie Feel- 
ing (F) judgments. And if they prefer to use Judging (J) 
rather than Perceiving (P) in interacting with the world 
around them, they are likely to be more comfortable when 
they can organize the events of their lives than when they 
can only experience and adapt to them. On the other 
hand, if a person prefers Introversion, Intuition, Feeling, 
and Perceiving (INFP), then the converse of the descrip- 
tion above is likely to be truc. 

The preferences and the specific dynamics of their inter- 
actions are discussed further in Chapters 3 and 4 of this 
book, in Gifts Differing (Myers with Myers, 1980/1995), in 
Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development (Myers &amp; 
Kirby, 1994), and in other publications. 


Overview 7 


Identifying MBTI Preferences 


The main objective of the MBTI is to identify which of two 
opposite categories is preferred on each of the four di- 
chotomies. The Indicator obtains a numerical score based 
on responses favoring one pole versus its opposite. These 
calculations are designed not as scales for measurement of 
traits or behaviors but rather as indications of preference for 
one pole ol a dichotomy or its opposite. The letters E or I, S 
or N, T or E and J or P are used to designate which of the 
opposite sides of a respondents nature are preferred. The 
intent is to reflect a habitual choice between rival alterna- 
tives, analogous to right-handedness or left-handedness. 
One expects to use both the right and left hands, even 
though one reaches first with the preferred hand. Similarly, 
everyone is assumed to use both sides ol each of the four 
dichotomies but to respond first, most often, and most 
comfortably with the preferred functions and attitudes. 


Items and Preference Clarity Index 


The MBTI items require forced choices between the poles ol 
the dichotomy at issuc. Choices are between seemingly 
inconsequential everyday events, chosen by Myers as stimuli 
to evoke the more comprehensive underlying type prefer- 
ences. All choices reflect the two poles of the same dichot- 
omy, that is, E or I, Sor N, Tor EJ or P On the computer- 
scored version of Form M, responses that best predict to 
total preference carry greater weight. On the template- and 
self-scorable versions, all the items have the same weight 
and are simply counted to determine which preference 
received the most answers. Technical details of item con- 
struction and weighting as developed and tested by Myers, 
as well as the methodology used in the current revision of 
the instrument, appear in Chapters 2 and 7. 

Form M computer-scored versions yield preferences 
based on an established midpoint. When a respondents score 
is to the right of the midpoint, the preference indicated is I, 
N, E or P. When the score is to the left of the midpoint, the 
persons preference is E, S, T, or J. Tied scores are designated 
as I, N, E or P in both the Myers and Form M scoring. The 
preference letters indicate which of each pair of opposites the 
person prefers and presumably has developed or is likely to 
develop to a greater degree. For example, a preference letter E 
suggests that the person prefers extraverting to introverting 
and probably has spent more time extraverting than intro- 
verting. Consequently, that person is likely to seek out and be 
more comfortable with activities that call for Extraversion 
than activities that call lor Introversion. For instance, such a 
person will presumahly find greater satisfaction in a career 
that requires more extraverting than introverting. 

As evidence that a preference has been accurately 
reported, MBTI results include an indication of clarity of 
preference termed a prefereuce clarity index. Preference clarity 
indexes range from I to 30 on cach of the four dichotomies. 


8 Introduction 





The higher the index, the greater the clarity of preference 
that can be assumed. For example, a person whose prefer- 
ence clarity index for Thinking is T 28 could be said to be 
much more clear in this preference than a person with T 
9—at least based on responses to the Indicator items. The 
characteristics associated with a preference may be (but are 
not necessarily) less apparent when a low clarity index is 
associated with a preference. A low preference clarity index 
results from almost equal votes for cach opposite pair in a 
dichotomy. It is incorrect to assume, however, that the per- 
son with, for example, N 30 has greater facility with, confi- 
dence in, or kcenness of Intuition than the person reporting 
N 15. Similar cautions apply to all eight preferences identificd 
by the preference clarity indexes of the MBTI. Thus unlike 
trait scores, health, competence, or maturity cannot be 
inferred from the numerical preference clarity index of the 
MBTI. Chapter 6 discusses these issues in greater detail. 





Assumptions Underlying the Types 


Each pole of a dichotomy is perceived as valuable and at 
times indispensable in its own area of operation. The theory 
assumes that all types can deal elfectively with life in gen- 
eral and in their own areas of potential talent in particular. 
All types are viewed as necessary in a complex world that 
relies on diversity and specialization to progress toward 
important personal and socictal goals. Each type has its 
own special gifts and strengths, its own arcas of vulnerabil- 
ity, and its own pathway for development. 

The type description presents these rclationships in 
everyday terms. Each type is described in terms of effective 
use of the functions and attitudes and also in terms of the 
specific difficulties arising when type is less developed or 
not used effectively. The four letters that designate a type 
provide a compact definition of each type (e.g., EST], INFJ, 
ESFP). The dynamic interrelationships of the preferences 
arc described in Chapter 3 along with the behavioral char- 
acteristics associated with each preference pattern. 





Uses of the MBTI Instrument 


The dillerences described by the MBTI are a familiar part 
of everyday life. Jungs theory offers an explanation for 
these differences that makes it easier to recognize them 
and to use them in constructive ways. The theory is indis- 
pensable for understanding and using the MBTI, but the 
majority of people who have found the MBTI interesting 
and valuable did not have an original interest in Jung. 
Rather, general interest in the MBTI is due to the fact that 
almost every human experience involves either perception 
or judgment and is played out in either the extraverted 
world of action or the introverted world of reflection. 
There is therefore a broad range of human activities where 
type differences are apparent. A good deal of research that 
examines the ways the MBTI has been applied in the years 
since publication of the 1985 MBTI Manual appears in 
MBTI Applications: A Dccadc of Rescarch on the Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator (Hammer, 1996b). The five applica- 
tions chapters that appear in Part V of this manual cover the 
major ways the MBTI is currently being used. 


Conclusion 


This chapter has provided the context for understanding 
and using the MBTI. Users can effectively consult one or 
another chapter as appropriate to their stage of research or 
particular application. However, familiarity with the devel- 
opment and construction of the instrument (Chapters 2 
and 7) and the theory underlying the instrument (Chap- 
ters 3 and 4) will maximize the explanatory and predictive 
potential of the MBTI. Reviewing these chapters is there- 
fore recommended. 


Construction of the MBTI 
Development of the MBTI 
The 1998 Revision 


Conclusion 


A Tradition of Change 


he implementation of Jungs theory of psychological 

type by Isabel Briggs Myers and Katharine Briggs in 
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator has endured for more than 
50 years. Today the MBTI is the most widely used personal- 
ity instrument in the world—2 million administrations are 
given each year. The history of the MBTI has been marked 
by evolving ideas of type theory interpretation, application 
of the instrument in new areas, and nearly constant 
research. Isabel Briggs Myers herself continually unkered 
with the items and the scoring procedures. Yet the assump- 
tions underlying the initial construction of the MBTI have 
formed the foundation for the continued devclopment of 
the instrument. These assumptions, and the construction 
procedures that follow from them, represent the rich tradi- 
tion that has grounded all changes to the instrument. 
Change, in the sense of constant improvement and devel- 
opment, has always been part of the tradition of the MBTI 


personality inventory. 


9 


10 


Introduction 


— M c 


400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 


50 


1957 
1959 
1961 
1963 
1965 
1967 
1969 
1971 
1973 


1975 


1977 
1979 
1981 
1983 
1985 
1987 
1989 
1991 
1993 


Figure 2.1 Number of Articles About the MBTI Published by Year from 1957 to 1994 
Source From MBTI applicavons. A decode of research on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (p. 2), A. L Hammer (Ed.). 1996 Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1996 by Consulting Psychologists Press. 


Used with permission 


Since its introduction, the Indicator has continued to 
mature through 11 revised forms and alternative methods 
for administering and scoring those forms (e.g., self- 
scorable, mail-in, template scoring). Between 1988 and 
1997, there were four forms of the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator in wide use—Forms E G, J, and K—and three levels 
of interpretation. These three levels are referred to as Steps 
Il, W and Il]. The MBTI Step I consists of four separate 
scales designed to determine a persons preferences on four 
dichotomies, E-1, S-N, T-F, and J-P. The result of Step I 
scoring of the MBTI] is a four-letter type, e.g., ENFP. Two 
scoring variations were created in the 1980s, using Forms J 





and K, that extended the original research by Isabel Briggs 
Myers and focused on the measuring of individual differ- 
ences within type. These two scoring methodologies—now 
called the MBTI Step II (formerly the Expanded Analysis 
Report, or EAR) and the MBTI Step HI (formerly the Type 
Differentiation Indicator, or TDI)—add depth to the explo- 
ration of type dynamics and type development by the addi- 
tion of subscales or facets associated with each of the 





dichotomous preferences. Finally, inspired by the observed 
and potential benefits derived from understanding type 
differences in educational settings, the Murphy-Meisgcicr 
Iype Indicator for Children (MMTIC) was developed in 
1987 by Elizabeth Murphy and Charles Meisgeier. Its pur- 
pose is to make type concepts available to younger respon- 
dents and to aid teachers in understanding various learn- 
ing styles. 

As the use of the MBTT has grown, so have the applica- 
tions of the instrument. The original use of the Indicator 


was in personal counseling, career counseling, and educa- 
tion. There has been considerable growth of the Indicator 
into new areas such as organizations, leadership, manage- 
ment development, and multicultural settings. 

Research on the instrument has kept pace with the appli- 
cations, with more than 4,000 research studies, journal arti- 
cles, and dissertations written on the Indicator since the 
publication of the first MBTI manual in 1962. This explo- 
sion of research represents one of the most extensive empir- 
ical loundations for any psychometric personality assess- 
ment. Figure 2.1 shows the number of publications per 
year. Many of the studies conducted since the publication 
of the 1985 MBTI Manual are summarized in the book 
MBTI Applications: A Decade of Rescarch on the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator (Hammer, 1996b). 

The purpose of this chapter is to briefly summarize 
what has and has not changed with the 1998 revision of 
the MBTI. Longtime users of the instrument will find this 
material useful in quickly orienting themselves to the 
revised instrument. New users may not need to read this 
chapter, although they may find it interesting. To place this 
revision in its propcr context, we first discuss the princi- 
ples of construction, including the underlying assump- 
tions guiding the development of the instrument. This is 
followed by a review of past developments in the history of 
ihe instrument. We then introduce the 1998 revision, fol- 
lowed by a brief summary of the revision process. All of the 
topics discussed in this chapter are presented in more detail 
in Chapter 7 of this manual, and users are urged to read that 
chapter carefully. 


A Tradition of Change 11 





Construction of the MBTI 


At all stages in its development, construction of the MBTI 
was governed by unusual requirements imposed by a work- 
ing hypothesis. The hypothesis is that certain valuable dif- 
ferences in normal people result from their preferred ways of 
using perception and judgment. Each ol thesc preferences, 
being a choice between opposites, is by nature “either-or,” 
that is, a dichotomy. The MBTI Step I contains four separate 
scales designed to determine a persons prclerences on four 
dichotomies, E-1, S-N, T-E and J-P. Each dichotomy, 
according to the hypothesis, produces two categories of peo- 
ple. An individual will belong to one or the other category 
based on his or her makeup and inclination. The object of 
the MBTI is to ascertain, as accurately as possible, the four 
categories to which the respondent naturally belongs, for 
instance ENTP or ISFJ. This basic working hypothesis has 
remained as the foundation of the 1998 revision. 


Underlying Assumptions 


Jungs theory of psychological types provided the assump- 
tions and set the tasks for the initial construction of the MBTI 
and for all of the revisions that have been made since, includ- 
ing the current one. These assumptions are as follows: 


m “True preferences" actually exist. These preferences can 
be more confidently identified in persons with good type 
development (see Chapter 3 for an explanation of type de- 
velopment), than in persons with inadequate type 
development. However, any instrument must maximize 
the probability that persons unsure of their preferences 
will be correctly assigned to a category. 

m Persons can give an indication of the preferences that 
combine to form type, directly or indirectly, on a scH- 
report inventory. 

gm [he preferences are dichotomized, and the two poles of a 
preference are cqually valuable, each in its own sphere. 


Types, Not Traits 


The assumptions stated above are not typical of most psy- 
chological measures. Most current measures ol personality 
hypothesize the existence of one or more psychological 
“traits.” In the trait model, the person is assumed to “have” 
varied amounts of these characteristics. The instruments 
designed to assess traits arc thus intended to measure how 
much of the particular characteristic the person possesses. In 
this model, one end of the trait dimension is usually consid- 
ered to be good, or better than the other, and the other end to 
be “bad,” or at least less good. Furthermore, in many trait 
models, having too much or too little of the characteristic 
(depending on which one is being measured) can be viewed 
as being neurotic. For example, a trait often found on trait- 
based personality measures is “dominance.” Based on their 
responses to test items, people are assigned a score that is 


assumed to indicate how much dominance they “have.” A 
reasonably high score on a dominance scale might be inter- 
preted as positive, suggesting that the person demonstrates 
appropriate “amounts” of assertion or leadership. Too high of 
a score on dominance, however, may be interpreted as indi- 
cating an aggressive or controlling approach to social or work 
situations. Likewisc, a low score on the dominance scale may 
bc labeled “submissive” and carry a negative connotation. 

In contrast, the intent of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
is specifically not to measure traits, but rather to sort people 
into equally valuable groups to which, in accordance with 
Jungs theory, they already belong. These groups are the 16 
types. This intent has important implications for the con- 
struction of the instrument and the interpretation of the 
results, as well as for the kind of evidence sought to estab- 
lish its validity. 


Major Tasks Involved in Construction 


The foregoing basic assumptions have guided the construc- 
tion of the Indicator at cach stage in its long history, includ- 
ing the present revision. Although each revision has been 
the result of a lengthy and complicated process, the follow- 
ing outline provides a simple description of the major tasks 
involved in the construction of the instrument: 


l. Determine items to reflect preferences described by 
Jung for Extraversion or Introversion (E-I), Sensing 
or Intuition (S-N), and Thinking or Feeling (T-F). 
Also, determinc items for thc J-P scale, which was crc- 
ated by Myers to identify preferences for the Judging 
or Percciving attitudes in their extraverted appearance, 
so that this information could be used to determine a 
dominant function. 

. Write, test, weight, and select items that would achieve 
the widest separation and least overlap between the two 
kinds of people preferring opposite poles of each scale. 

3. Maximize precision in the center, or midpoint, of the 

scale, so that persons reporting indeterminate prefer- 
ences would be more likely to be classified according 
to their “true” preference on each dichotomy. 


ht 


Development of the MBTI 


The MBTI has been developing since 1942, continuing to the 
present revision and publication of Form M in 1998. (A 
more complete history of the construction of the Indicator is 
found in Chapter 7 of this manual.) Over this period, 
improvements to and development of the MBTI have 
occurred in the following areas: language of the items, num- 
ber of items, item format, item weights and scoring method, 
gender differences, tic-brcaking method, location of the divi- 
sion point, expansion beyond Step | into additional scoring 
methods, and composition of the standardization group. 
Each of these is briefly reviewed in the following sections. 


l 


2 [niroduction 


Language of the Items 


The language of the items has been changed periodically to 
rellect usage current at the time, and items have sometimes 
bcen modified to eliminate ambiguity or awkward alterna- 
tives. In making changes to items, the guiding principle has 
been that the content of the item is less important than the 
need for the words and form of the sentence to serve as a 
"stimulus to evoke a type response." What has remained 
constant is that the responses for each item have been writ- 
ten to appeal to the appropriate types. For example, when 
writing an item for thc J-P scale, every effort has been made 
to make the Perceiving response to a J-P item as attractive to 
Perceiving types as the Judging response is to Judging types. 
The success of the item in evoking a response from the per- 
son for whom it was intended has always been considcred 
more important than content coverage of Jungs theory. 


For Form M, a thorough review of all of the items contained 
in Form J of the MBTI was performed to identify those with 
outdated or awkward language. Form J was used because it 
contained all of the items that had ever been considered in 
years of testing by Myers. 


Number of Items 


Prior to the publication of Form M, the number of items 
across thc various forms of the Indicator varicd from as few 
as 94 in the self-scoring version of Form G to 290 in Form J. 
Not all of these items have been used in scoring for type, 
however; some have been included on various forms for 
research purposes. For example, Form G contains 126 
items, 94 of which are scored for type and 32 of which are 
unscorcd research items. Also, items on some forms that are 
not scored for type are used to score the subscales in Step II 
and Step HI scoring procedures. 





Form M contains 93 items, all of which are scored for type. 





Item Format 


Originally all MBTI items were phrasc questions, followed 
by a choice of two or morc responses. Word-pair questions 
were added for Forms E and E The instructions in paren- 
theses for word pairs were added for Form G because inter- 
views with persons taking Form F revealed that some had 
answered some of the word pairs on the basis of the sound 
or appearance of the words, not their meaning. 





Form M contains both word-pair and phrase questions. 





Item Weights and Scoring Method 

In Forms A and B of the Indicator, the items all had the same 
weight, and overall preference was determined by simply 
adding up the number of items indicated for cach preference 


lor cach scale. Beginning with Form C, a new scoring sys- 
tem was used, called the prediction ratio (PR) method. The 
prediction ratio shows the probability that, say, a response 
designed for Judging types is in fact given by Judging types 
and is not given by Perceiving types. This method yields 
separate prediction ratios for each of the two responses to 
the items. In this manner, it takes social desirability into 
account. This method was employed to arrive at the four 
letters of type for all forms of the Indicator from Form C 
through Form K. 





Form M uses a method called item response theory (IRT) to 
score for type. Research conducted for the revision suggests 
that IRT provides a more precise indication of preference, 
particularly around the midpoint of the scale, than does the 
prediction ratio method. The new scoring method is described 
in detail in Chapter 7 of this manual. 





Differential Weights by Gender 


Throughout the development of the MBTI, all item analyses 
were computed separately for males and females. In the 
early forms, separate scoring keys for males and females 
were used for E-l, S-N, T-F and J-P. Beginning with Forms 
E and E the same keys were used for both genders because 
item analyses showed that item popularity and prediction 
ratios were comparable on E-l, S-N, and J-P. On the T-F 
scale, it was evident that females, even those who in their 
behavior and attitudes indicated a clear preference for 
Thinking, had a greater tendency to give certain Feeling 
responses than did males. The difference was ascribed 
cither to the possibility that certain Feeling responses were 
more socially desirable for females than for males or to the 
effect of social training. Separate weights were assigned to 
T-F items for each sex, based on thc prediction ratios for 
each item, with checks that the criterion groups were 
assigned the correct preference. 





For Form M, all of the items in the initial item pool were 
analyzed using a technique derived from IRT called differen- 
tiol item functioning. All items from any scale that demon- 
strated significant differential responses by gender were 
eliminated from the item pool. This in turn eliminated the 
need for differential item weights on Form M. 


Tie-Breaking Method 


In the early stages of the MBTI development, equal points 
for the poles of the same scale were designated by an x; 
thus a type might be designated IxTJ or ENEx. With Form 
F a tie-breaking formula was adopted. If the raw points 
derived from adding the weights for the item responses 
associated with each preference were equal, the tie was bro- 
ken in the favor of I, N, E or P, depending on the scale. The 
rationale lor this method was that, given U.S. culture, social 
desirability may affect a person's responses in the direction 


of E, S, T, or J. Thus any ties may be the result of responding 
in a socially desirable manner. 

The use of IRT to score the MBTI inventory makes it 
nearly impossible for a score to land exactly at the midpoint 
of the scale. On the extremely rare occasion when this hap- 
pens, a tie-breaker continues to be used with Form M. 





On Form M, all ties are broken in the same direction as with 
previous forms of the Indicator: l, N, F, or P. 





Locating the Division Point 


In Form A, where all items had equal weight, the division 
point was the point on a scale where half the items were 
answered for each pole. By definition this point was the 
boundary between people showing one preference and peo- 
ple showing the opposite preference. Later, external criteria 
were employed to help determine the exact location of the 
division point. For example, E-l continuous scores were 
regressed onto a rating of gregariousness. Signiftcant changes 
in the level and slope of the regression line helped indicate 
the location on the E-I continuum that provided maximum 
separation between Extraverts and Introverts. This and 
other external criteria are reviewed in Chapter 7. 





For Form M, the division point was set based on the results 
of a best-fit type study. For each scale, the location of the 
point was chosen to maximize agreement between the best- 
fit and the Form M scored preference. 


Step Il and Step IIl Scoring Methods 


In the late 1980s, two new scoring methods were developed 
that have come to be known as Step II and Step III. These 
methods both include subscales that show facets or a more 
fine-grained structure within the four dichotomous scales. 
These scoring systems are described in their respective 
manuals (Saunders, 1987, 1989) and are not covered in the 
present manual. 

Since Form M is a Step I scoring method, that is, it is 
scored only for the four letters of type, it does not include 
any of the subscales. 


Standardization Groups 


Katharine Briggs and Isabel Briggs Myers first tested tlie ini- 
tial items that became the MBTI on a small criterion group 
of about 20 of their relatives and friends whose type prefer- 
ences seemed to them to be clearly evident from a 20-year 
period of observing their behavior. As data on the item 
responses started to accumulate, larger samples were used 
to check or determine item weights in later forms of the 
Indicator. These initial criterion samples mainly included 
adults because adults were expected to have reached higher 
levels of type development and therefore to be clearer about 
their preferences and better able to report them. However, a 


A Tradition of Change 13 


sample of students—the Swarthmore class of 1943— was 
also included in the initial criterion groups. Later, addi- 
tional student samples were included. 

Between 1975 and 1977, a new standardization of items 
was carried out. The new analyses seemed appropriate to 
ensure that cultural changes had not decreased the utility of 
items and to make some minor modifications that. two 
decades of experience had suggested were desirable. As a 
result of the analyses of the restandardization, the scoring 
weights for the T-F scale were modified for Form E and a new 
revision of the Indicator, Form G, was published in 1977. 


The standardization sample for Form M is based on a national 
representative sampling of adults over the age of [8 years. 
This is the first time that the item weights for the MBTI 
inventory have been based on a large national sampling. The 
characteristics of this sample are described in Chapter 7 of 
this manual. 


The 1998 Revision 


As is evident from the bricf history of the development ol 
the MBTI inventory outlined above, the instrument has a 
long tradition of change, adjustment, and refinement. AH of 
the changes made have been in the service of improving the 
psychometric properties of the instrument while remaining 
true to Jungs theory of types. These changes have resulted 
in an instrument that more consistently and correctly iden- 
tifies people's preferences. The 1998 revision of the MBTI 
Step I continues this tradition. 

In this section, we present the rationale for the 1998 
revision, followed by the specific goals that provided the 
targets for the rescarch efforts. The revision process is then 
described, followed by a brief overview of the changes 
made. 


Rationale for the Revision 


People who take the MBTI inventory may make important 
life decisions based on the results. These results can have a 
significant impact on a persons self-understanding and selt- 
esteem. Many current MBTI practitioners, in fact, became 
interested in the instrument after seeing the positive effect 
an interpretation could have on their clients. Organizations 
that use the instrument may base important business deci- 
sions on the outcomes. Results can affect how individuals 
on teams interact with one another or can help identify 
sources of job satisfaction. Because of the importance that is 
placed on the results, it is essential that they be as accurate 
and precise as possible. This was the overarching motiva- 
tion driving all revision activities. Within this context, a 
number of events, observations, and research results sug- 
gested that it was time to examine the possibility of making 
some refinements or improvements to the Indicator. 


14 Introduction 


Cultural Changes Cultural changes over the past 20 years 
indicated that item endorsement rates should be re- 
examined. The rationale was that such changes might affect 
how certain words or phrases are interpreted, which might 
affect responses to the items, which in turn might lead to 
changes in the item weights. Also, the prediction ratios used 
to derive the weights for Form G were based largely on 
samples of high school and college students, and it was 
desirable, given that more working adults are taking the 
Indicator, to base weights on a more representative sample. 
It was also desirable to have various culturally diverse 
groups reflected in the standardization sample. 

Cultural changes in the roles of women in society indi- 
cated that the separate weights used to score responses for 
males and females on the T-F scale should be examined. 
Rescarch supported this observation. Harris and Carskadon 
(1988) suggested that the old Form F weights were more 
valid for men than were the Form G weights. Also, applica- 
tion of IRT-based differential item functioning techniques 
(Greenberg &amp; Harvey, 1993) led the authors to conclude 
that separate weights were not needed for this scale. 


New Research Research had also shown that the internal 
consistency reliabilities of the Thinking-Fecling scale were 
typically among the lowest (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985), 
suggesting that the issue of using separate weights on this 
scale needed to be reexamined. Researchers also realized, 
however, that the lower reliabilities on this scale might 
involve issues of type development as much as issues of 
measurement and scoring procedures. 

Test-retest reliabilities for whole types were lower than 
hoped for (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985), although the per- 
cent agreement varies widely across studies. The meta- 
analysis by Harvey (1996) shows that the agreement across 
all four scales was 36% for studies in which the retest 
period was greater than nine'months and 51% for studies in 
which the retest period was less than nine months. (Har- 
veys summary was based on Table 10.6, page 173, of the 
1985 Manual.) lt is hypothesized that one reason for the 
low percent agreement is the possibility of misclassification 
around the midpoints of the separate scales. Note that since 
the four preferences that constitute a type are measured on 
tour separate scales, only a small percentage of misclassifi- 
cations on each scale can add up across all four scales to 
yicld a lower than desired agreement on whole types. For 
example, the average test-retest agreement on each of the 
E-1, S-N, I-E and J-P preference scales for periods of less 
than nine months is 82%, 87%, 82%, and 83%, respectively. 

A number of studies have compared reported or MBT! 
type with “best-fit” type. Percent agreement in these studies 
ranges from 64% to 85%. When there has been disagree- 
ment between the type reported by the MBTI and the type 
verified by the individual, it almost always has occurred on 
those scales on which the person reported only a slight 
prelerence on the instrument. 


A review conducted in 1994 of Form J, which contains 
all of the MBTI items developed by Myers, suggested that a 
small but potentially significant portion of the items used 
vocabulary that was colloquial or subject to possihle social 
desirability response sets, particularly for young people. 

Research by Harvey and his colleagues (Harvey &amp; Murry, 
1994; Harvey, Murry, &amp; Markham, 1994) suggested that 
measurement error on the MBTI scales may have been par- 
ticularly troublesome around the midpoints of the scales, 
which would affect test-retest and best-fit type congruencies. 
A study by Thomas and Harvey (1995) suggested that the 
addition of new items to the MBTI item pool may improve 
the accuracy of the type classifications by increasing the 
precision around the midpoint when using IRT to seleet 
and score items. 


Goals of the 1998 Revision 


The fact remains that the current MBTI forms in use before 
the revision work as intended, and they work quite well. 
The data in the 1985 Manual and the review of most of the 
studies conducted since its publication (reviewed in MBTI 
Applications, Hammer, 1996b) support this conclusion. How- 
ever, the cultural changes and new research discussed in the 
preceding section suggested that certain improvements 
might be possible. Therefore, the purpose of the 1998 revi- 
sion of the MBTI was to balance the dual goals of preserving 
the integrity of the instrument and making psychometric 
improvements. 


Preserving the Integrity of the MBTI Inventory The need 
for preservation should be obvious. The Indicator has been 
used successfully for decades by millions of people. The 
characteristics of the instrument that have made it so useful 
to so many for so long should be retained if at all possible. 
These features include the following: 


m A focus on positive, normal, healthy behavior 
B A foundation in the theories of Jung and Myers 
m [he measurement of type as opposed to traits 


Improving the Instrument On the other hand, changes in 
culture and language, and advances in survey and test 
construction methodologies, suggested that certain 
innovations might be possible. Therefore, the following 
specific objectives were targeted for rescarch for the 1998 
revision: 


B To update item wording and remove outdated language 

B To increase the capacity of the instrument to differenti- 
ate, particularly around the midpoint of cach scale 

M To base the item weights of the MBTI on the responses 
from a national representative sample of adults 

B To decrease the number of items necessary for determin- 
ing a four-letter type 

B To improve item-to-scale correlations 

M To lower scale intercorrelations 


A Tradition of Change 15 


D—Ó————— M —MMÀ— M —— —À—À M MM —M — — M — M99 — X — M 


B Toeliminate separate gender scoring 

Eg To minimize the influence of social desirability in re- 
sponses to the items for different age and gender groups 

B To remove all items with more than two response options 

B lo explore state-of-the-art scoring methodologies con- 
sistent with the above goals 

B Toachieve improved validity of predicting “verified type” 
as an outcome of the hoped-for increased precision 


Overview of Changes 


The process used to move toward these goals involved 
many steps of item writing, item sclection, rescarch with 
different samples, and testing of various item sets. This 
process is described in detail in Chapter 7 of this manual. 
Here, however, we will present an overview of the 1998 
revision and highlight the changes that resulted in a new 
form of the MBTI—Form M. This overview deals primarily 
with four issues: changes in the wording of the items, item 
selection criteria, changes in the scoring, and changes in the 
standardization sample. 


Item Wording To examine the effect of item language, a 
number of items were revised and some new items were 
added to the tryout pool. The initial pool consisted of the 
290 items from Form J, 200 revised items (Thomas, 19962), 
and an additional 90 items written by two experts in the 
theory and use of type, making a total of 580 items. 

A number of items in this pool were then modified 
before testing. Some of the items that had been written in 
true/false format were changed to fit the format of MBTI 
items already in existence. All items with three or more 
response options were changed to allow only two response 
options. Both of these changes were made for consistency 
both within the item pool and with the theory. 

In revising items or writing new ones, the focus was on 
changes or additions that the item writers felt would better 
separate people with particular preferences into the appro- 
priate categories. This emphasis follows the techniques 
used by Myers in her many revisions and changes to the 
items. The content of a question was only a stimulus to 
evoke a type reaction; it was not determined by require- 
ments to provide a specified level of coverage of all of Jungs 
concepts rclated to that dichotomous preference. Nor were 
the content areas reflected in the questions meant to cover 
all domains of the preference. The intent was rather to iden- 
tify any clues about preference that would empirically dis- 
tinguish the two groups. The interest in questions was not 
in the superficial behavior reported but in the evidence the 
questions could provide about the underlying preferences. 

While this method governed the item-writing phase, 
some effort was made during ttem selection to ensure that 
the final set of items did provide good coverage of the 
domain of that dichotomy, at least as determined by the 
number of and the particular subscales covered by the items. 
For example, the E-1 questions touch on Extraverted and 


Introverted differences in sociability, friendship, intimacy, 
detachment or involvement, and outspokenness or reserve. 


Item Selection Item selection was based on multiple 
criteria, which are detailed in Chapter 7 of this manual. 
Basically, there were two sets of criteria: theoretical and 
empirical. Theoretical criteria demanded that items be 
congruent with Jungs and Myers’ theories of psychological 
opposites. Empirical criteria primarily centered on prediction 
ratios and item parameters derived from item response theory 

Jungs theory of type posits that people make choices 
between two opposite ways of perceiving and judging. For 
example, to function well, a person comes to prefer one of 
the two opposite ways of perceiving, Sensing or Intuition, 
because these two distinct ways of perceiving the world 
“compete” for the persons attention (Myers with Myers, 
1980/1995). So, because type theory postulates dichotomies, 
the tradition of presenting questions in forced-choice format 
was retained. However, since every person uses all eight of 
the preferences at different times, if each choice were pre- 
sented separately, both poles could be chosen and one 
could not know which pole was preferred. 

To be consistent with the forced-choice format, all Form 
J items that had more than two response options were 
either eliminated or rewritten so that there were only two 
response choices. Those two responses that had the greatest 
weights associated with them were retained, as these re- 
sponses did the best job of discriminating between people 
at the opposite poles of the dichotomy. An example of such 
an item is the following: 


Does the idea of making a list of what you should 
get done over the weekend 


(A) appeal to you, or 
.B leave you cold, or 


(C&gt; positively depress you? 


As illustrated in this example, response (C) was deleted and 
the item was placed in the initial pool for further testing 
with only the (A) and (B) responses, which are keyed to the 
J and P preferences, respectively. 

Another theoretical criterion that was used to guide item 
selection was the need to have the item pool for each scale 
reflect the richness of that preference domain. As the Step H 
scoring of the MBTI demonstrates, each of the four preter- 
ence domains can be further subdivided into a number of 
subscales. Each of the four dichotomies encompasses more 
than is represented by its five subscales—the subscales are 
samples of the greatly more complex preference domain. 
However, the subscales do provide a criterion by which the 
richness of the domain can be measured. Consequently, a 
number of items from cach of the 20 subscales of Step II 
were included in the initial item pool, and subscale coverage 
also played a role in the final item selection. 

Turning to the empirical criteria, the prediction ratio 
method was used to first climinate items whose ratios 
failed to reach the current cutoffs for item weights. These 


16 Introduction 


were items for which the ratios for both responses were 
less than .62, which would lead to item weights of 0 lor 
those responses. An obvious example of such an item is the 
following: 
When you have done all you can to remedy a troublesome 
situation, are you 
A. able to stop worrying about it, or 
B. still more or less haunted by it? 


Items for which one of the response weights is 0 do not 
function well to differentiate people of opposite preferences. 
Almost all of these items in fact were never intended to per- 
form this sorting function but rather werc designed to mea- 
sure specific subscales that appcar in the Step II and Step III 
scoring methodologies, as the above example demonstrates 
(from the Worried versus Carefree Comfort/Disconfort scale 
found in Step III scoring). 

Item response theory parameters were also used to select 
items. Primary considerations were the degree of discrimina- 
tion and the location of the maximum discrimination. The 
degree of discrimination refers to the probability that the item 
separates people of opposite preferences into the correct cate- 
gories. Location refers to where on the scale the maximum 
separation takes place. One of the responses to an item could 
be answered, for whatever reason, in the same way by almost 
everyone; only a few pcople with very clear preferences on one 
side of the dichotomy would answer it in the opposite direc- 
tion. An example is this item from the Thinking-Feeling scale: 


Would you rather work under someone who is 
A) always kind, or 


B&gt; always fair? 


Almost everyone, including those with a clear preference 
for Thinking, chose “always kind,” which is the response 
keyed to the Feeling prefcrence. Only a few people who 
reported a very clear preference for Thinking (i.e., those 
who answered almost every question on the T-F scale in 
the Thinking direction) responded *always fair." Appar- 
ently people who very consistently prefer Thinking are will- 
ing to put up with a certain amount of unkind bchavior as 
long as they can be assured that they arc being treated fairly. 
Such an item is not useful for separating people at the mid- 
point of the dichotomy and therefore was not selected for 
Form M. 

IRT was also used in another way to select items. Using 
an IRT technique called differential item functioning (DIF), 
cach item in the pool was examined to determine whether 
gender or age was significantly related to the response to 
the item. The DIF method is a powerful technique that can 
help determine whether the response to the item is better 
predicted by gender, for example, than by the persons pref- 
erence ona given MBTI dichotomy. Items from any of the 
four scales that showed differential responding by gender 
were eliminated. For example, the following item showed 
significant gender diflerences: 


Do you usually 
(A^ show your feelings freely, or 
(B) keep your feelings to yourself? 


While people of different preferences (on the E-1 and also 
perhaps on the T-F scale) may respond differently to this 
item, the different response rates by preference are not as 
grcat as is thc difference between males and females. This 
item was therefore eliminated. 

Elimination of items showing gender differences means 
that Form M does not require separate weights for males 
and females on the Thinking-Feeling scale, nor on any of 
the other three scales. This is the first form of the MBTI for 
which there is no scparate weighting for males and females 
on any of the scales. 

Although age differences were also examined, not all 
items showing age DIF were automatically eliminated. The 
items that did show age differences were generally of two 
kinds. One set included questions that younger respon- 
dents would have trouble answering because they have not 
had the experience necessary to respond. For example, one 
of the MBTI questions includes the response “when run- 
ning a business meeting . . . ," which is unlikely to be in the 
behavioral repertoire of an 18-year-old respondent. Another 
example is this word pair from the E-I scale: 


party (A) CB^ theater 


Based on the response data, young people either have little 
idea of what a theater actually is or see this as not a very 
attractive choice when compared with a party. This item 
was therefore eliminated, as were other such items. 

A second set of items showing age DIF were items that 
were more devclopmental in nature. These primarily 
tended to be items from the J-P scale that asked thc 
respondent to choose between planning versus acting 
spontaneously. These items were retained (if they met the 
other criteria described in Chapter 7) in order to not elimi- 
nate items that might be sensitive to the devclopment of 
preferences. A possible outcome of this decision is that 
test-retest reliabilities may be lower, especially over long 
periods, for younger respondents. 


Scoring Scoring includes a decision about how to weight 
items and then how to summarize the responses to the items 
iuto an overall indication of preference. Since one of the 
primary goals of the revision was to improve the clas- 
sification of people around the midpoint of cach scale, 
scoring and weighting schemes were examined for their 
capacity to increase the precision around the midpoint of 
cach dichotomous scale. Two different approaches to scoring 
were tested and compared: the prediction ratio method, and 
an approach based on item response theory. For each of these 
two approaches, a number of scoring alternatives were 
devised and tested. To determine which was the better 
approach, a large-scale best-fit type study was conducted. 








Isabel Briggs Myers developed the earliest items of the 
Indicator using a select criterion group whose type prefer- 
ences were clear enough to be manifest consistently in 
observable behavior. Purely observational data collected by 
means of a small criterion group, while essential to the ini- 
tial stages of a personality assessment and to later valida- 
tion, gave way early in Myers research to larger, heteroge- 
neous samples and to a reliance on determining statistical 
rclationships among these data. However, the fundamental 
objective of comparing a person's knowledge and aware- 
ness of his or her best-fit type against the reported type on 
the Indicator—and using a sample large enough to yield 
ample statistical power—has been undertaken only in 
recent years. 

The best-fit type study undertaken to test alternative 
scoring methods involved administering the MBTI to more 
than 2,400 people nationwide. (Methods and results are 
described in more detail in Chapter 7 of this manual.) In 
addition to responding to the Indicator, each person also 
participated in a face-to-face interpretation, either individu- 
ally with the interpreter or in a group feedback setting. The 
interpretations covered the theory of psychological types 
and a description of the preferences. Each person was asked 
to identify the type he or she belicved provided the best fit. 
Each person was also asked to rate, on a scale of I to 5, his 
or her level of confidence in the estimatc. The best-fit type 
estimates were then compared with the types that were 
derived by applying the different scoring procedures to the 
item responses. 

The results indicated that one of the IRT alternative scor- 
ing methods provided the highest percentage of matches 
with the best-fit type estimates. The sample was divided in 
many different ways—by clarity of preference, age, gender, 
ethnic group, confidence rating, and type of interpreta- 
tion—and in every analysis the IRT approach provided at 
least a marginally better match with best-fit type. This ap- 
proach was then adopted as the scoring procedure for the 
1998 revision. 





Standardization Sample The item weights used to score 
previous versions of the Indicator were based on prediction 
ratios that were calculated from the responses of high 
school and college students. Although these samples were 
large and efforts were made to select samples that might 
provide a substantial degree of variability, a more recent 
and representative sample was desired. Consequently, re- 
searchers collected a national random sample. Households 
across the United States were selected by random-digit 
dialing of telephone numbers. Specific population demo- 
graphic targets for the final sample were based on the latest 
U.S. census. More than 8,000 people were contacted; of 
these, about +,000 who matched the census targets agreed 
to participate and were mailed copies of the MBTI research 
form, along with an extensive demographic questionnaire. 
Responses were received from about 8076 of the sample who 


A Iradiuon ol Change 17 


Table 2. A Summary of What's New 
and What's Not: Form M 


Tradition 





|. Based on the same philosophy that all preferences are equally 
valuable 


Item selection based on Jung’s and Myers’ theories of type 
Focus on separating people into types, not measuring traits 
Fifty-one items with the same wording as on current forms 
Same forced-choice item format 

Same two-item formats: phrase questions and word pairs 


Multiple levels of scoring: Steps I, Il, and III 


CONDES TS 


Same four dichotomous preference scales, combined to yield 
l6 types 


9. Professional qualifications still required to purchase administra- 
tion and scoring materials 


Innovation 





|l. Forty-two items with new and updated wording 


2. New scoring system based on item response theory, yielding 
more precise measurement, especially around the midpoint of 
each scale 


New reports and support materials 
No items with more than two possible responses 


One less item overall 


oe 


No separate weights for the Thinking-Feeling (or any other) 
scale 


= 


Item weights based on responses of national sample of adults 


8. Improved internal consistency and test-retest reliability of each 
of the four preference scales 


Ss EON'TEIUTE, ee Eee ee XI CO LM 


received the forms. This sample of 3,200 adults was then 
used to determine the item weights. (The characteristics of 
this sample are described in greater detail in Chapter 7 of 
this manual.) 


Conclusion 


Because one of the goals of the 1998 revision was preserva- 
tion of the MBTI tradition, users will note many similarities 
between Form M and previous forms of the Indicator. 
These similarities, as well as the changes, are outlined in 
Table 2.1. It can be observed in this table that the basic 
foundations of the MBTI, those characteristics that have 
made it the most widely used personality test in the world, 
have not changed. The changes to the instrument are pri- 
marily technical and were intended to ensure that the mea- 
surement of type keeps up with and takes advantage of the 
latest advances in psychometrics and test development. 





d 
EA 
á $e a wan etfi e^ 
nre Wiles ; 
pu Xe cumin t^e TUS jene E 
ii gio U bruma T Soper LT 
ap «oam 7n e *&amp; t, "4124/78. v maoo cu Watt DI M 
Je p cel 4 
Pet MI 00d: 0 n - Moe and &lt;n Gers a, 
T oP mite gave oe yw tole 
14 á E i a g 
à "i cenit 
PE =d " — M &gt;) ag " += x, Le 
gri ama ear of apa hee widow. ‘38: 
y A Tari *: OPs Dus e ben E AERA we Ji 
iors p* Wht at « Pot wot Ap er "0*1. 4 
5. Si wi t 10) 
qo. ie gp «leet ptm mi A, 1 
aw owe uo Vom piter dem OM 
ê ' = e CAL M uw. 1 
bd malia ae 5*4 a v b p Ct M « 
i y EM 
DIM TII 
sor adco Ts "e. 4 o "aiv &gt; le sacl pear ya 
Te"? Owen E- neJ. 
pA EEE 
* nmt J I 
4 ! L^ p us i : í a 
i i l L 
. yn, | Hes 1M 54 L; IT o CeL ! é , TEI «ett ba r Md 
IT I Tan gs. EPIS) am’ ul) ACIES DE DU "C468 
ae! qu N "iuret no 9 e ob ope erin’ uri 
DUTA TISA 
Tm 
bm B $ &lt;i P æF ra 


tamm 


sas te ile aw se Chet odi deu 
"ii Uso 6c Peer gon TROC P AC 
$ (d Ns hoa? ap urbs Y8 ut ves 

1 rem DET. ec UN Owe" 
j eur gant ZIEL LU UL uu iu 
"homi me wheel lado acne 

(d mo d onn uar wa coa oo pm P$ tdt 
Up fus omitto Be ut uel ol P e Buy Au 


Ger). PR &gt; v 
on te b Twa, 
nn mU m 


o b de upon crit 
quU mm agp Heine 
up ieee ttd Gavia oer 


* 


b yaw A TAE 
Ray ode t w 
a) Paes 












































E i 
xiii pat Gir wh lile iced EL 


b epee fosyerc id norm &gt; rion p iet 
" v Wyasecqu tl ca t «v tQ gu —— 
pati LE i. a fuc | 
ME Lx Ag a. EX P 
imc. ve Bm E 
A me} UoxsnQ 20 ET T Mt 
uh ^ Kie saag * an 5 en "n &amp; ^i Me R: 


IE nsa LRL. 


hs, he y rw 01 
ser E 


om Ms K 
yS € a E 


E" "ipe 
"n prie ¢ 





if 


! at DR iod d vada m 
mot ql t ir) Lcd Iu 3 ate 
Mp siirat der D i 


(ài ! : TT. in = "a 


ddl SEHE. as 


= 


I 
B^ 
» t n 






1 hp! Peia A 
de A 1% eter 
oi) l (LÀ Aue (ram ins Ne 

J ak a Bs (ste Pad Fi as T t E Y 

2 and à «hh wii tle u " ^ 
T, F- l i iss IM, Ta Lad m e 
di wea? ists du. cw ipie 





guia l Ó 
: oye yv 


! ew 
aue ri sát ee quae ama inl 
9365 gen, RAR A SR, wit. tolus 
Ln SQ pcr BGs OL toni cy, iuc! ep 
"wo io Wu Barrow apt ad. Ve tyx d 4 
sav ando erm b ie ain 9 UAS 
heat ting am Pence Ma a! d MD 
2d ng aat ong de e zr vin 
i. ae pip E TOAN A UE A 

mele souune al (his 4 al : 


oe M Ue ia ty Tl Mt Moe A 
To ue na in Vastu? naw BAT sr e Sa 
' wo euo nd mow die p 
et $86 aou Ro tait 4 A 
er roy Tau edt, a 
we J doti o 
e. 9 had VM 
‘sowie @ , 
Hys vati irt Ma p 
dé $e (iare i 
Te aeg a oui 
po) M rM | 
bod a Ji 
4 var und | 
Nu wot S 


: ti tnus 4 My 


u E S E. FF 


302 “iy ae 


E 


IT ILC Y 4 L i 















í 9 »" JÂ 


pre As i) s epi a 
NEXU esc diar i 
Ma a Anaiak Wr alatu 


| heory I] 


art I! of this manual comprises Chapters 3 and 4. 

These two chapters cover the theoretical basis of the 
MBTI! and as such are critical to understanding the remain- 
der of the manual and to using type in accurate and effec- 
live ways. 


Chapter 3, “The Theory Behind the MBTI,” puts Jungs 
theory and Myers and Briggs’ extension of it into historical 
perspective, showing how Jungs initial notion of two oppo- 
site categorics grew to encompass three pairs ol opposites, 
later evolving into the four dichotomies defined by Myers 
and Briggs. As you read Chapter 3, you will become aware 
of the following: 


m All of the opposite functions and attitudes are used by 
every individual at lcast some of the time. 

B The Judging—Perceiving dichotomy permits two kinds of 
balancc in our personalities. 

m The theory describes the dynamic ways in which cach 
type is likely to develop over the life span. 

B The environment plays a very important role in the 
development and expression of type. 

m A pcrsons preference for Extraversion or Introversion 
and for Judging or Perceiving enables us to determine 
the dynamics of her or his type. 

B People usually necd a “good reason” for using a less- 
preferred function or attitude. 


In reading this chapter, you may notice that you find it 
easier to understand and see the value of your own prce- 
ferred poles of each dichotomy but that it takes morc effort 
and objectivity to appreciate and value your less-preterred 
personality parts. You may also recognize as you read that 
one or the other pole of cach dichotomy may be more gen- 
erally valued within our culture or other cultures. Aware- 
ness of both personal type bias and societal type bias is cen- 
tral to maintaining an objective perspective as you read the 
second chapter in Part II. 


20 Theory 


M — ———MM — 


Chapter 4, "Understanding the 16 Types," presents sev- 
eral approaches that will help new users begin to under- 
stand the dctails about the types. The chapter also provides 
experienced users with some new ways of understanding 
and explaining the dynamic aspects of the typology. Read- 
ers are shown how to read and use type tables for quick 
access to group type differences. This is followed by a 
description of and rationale for the precise terminology 
needed to describe different type groupings. The remainder 
of the chapter identifies, describes, and provides supporting 
research for groupings of types that consist of specific two- 
letter combinations. The 16 full type descriptions and sup- 
porting research summaries complete Chapter 4. As you 
read Chapter 4 you will become aware of the following: 


B There is a difference between, for example, dominant 
introverted Sensing types (IST] and ISFJ) and Introverts 
with Sensing (IST], ISFJ, ISTP, and ISFP). 

B A good deal of research has been conducted with some 
groupings of types and very little with others. 


B [he workplace accommodates the values and goals 
of some types more readily than it does those of other 
types. 

m Different types find different aspects of life more and 
less stressful and cope with perceived stresses in type- 
consistent ways. 

B Asscssing the 16 types from a single-norm perspective 
leads to some “positive-seeming” and “negative-sceming” 
research results. 

m When we evaluate research, we must be careful to avoid 
falling into a "trait perspective" that makes some types 
look "better" than others. 


Much material is covered in Chapter 4, and it varies in 
complexity. For newcomers to type, keeping type dynamics 
accurately in mind takes practice and repctition. They may 
find it difficult to fully absorb some of the information in 
this chapter. These readers might find it useful to revisit the 
chapter after they become more experienced and comfort- 
able with the language and concepts of type. 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 


A Brief History of Type Theory 
The Four Functions 

The Four Attitudes or Orientations 
TheTheory of Type Development 


The Dynamic Interaction 
of the Preferences 


Conclusion 


very individual is unique. Each of us is a product of 

heredity and environment and, as a result, is differ- 
ent from everyone else. The doctrine of uniqueness, how- 
ever, gives no practical help in understanding the people 
whom we must educate, counsel, work with, or interact 
with in our personal lives. 


[n practice we tend to assume unconsciously that other 
peoples minds work on the same principles as our own. All 
too often, however, the people with whom we interact do 
not reason as we reason, do not value the things we value, 
or are not interested in what interests us. The assumption of 
similarity, therefore, can promote misunderstanding of the 
motives and behaviors of people whose minds operate quite 
differently from our own. 

The value of the theory underlying the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator personality inventory is that it enables us to 
expect specific differences in specific people and to cope 
with people and their dilferences more constructively than 
we otherwise could. Briefly, the theory is that much seem- 
ingly chance variation in human behavior in fact is not due 
to chance; it is the logical result of a few basic, observable 
preferences. 

In developing the Indicator, Isabel Myers’ primary aim 
was to give individuals access to the benefits of knowing 
their personality type. A secondary and vital goal was to 
validate C. G. Jungs theory of psychological types (Jung, 
1921/1971) and to put it to practical use. Jungian theory 
was taken into account in every question and in every step 
of development of the MBTI instrument. Details of the 
research leading up to the development of Form M are 
described in Chapter 7. The MBTI theory is explained in 
detail in Gifts Differing (Myers with Myers, 1980/1995), a 


21 


22 Theory 


basic reference for all who plan to use the MBTI, The 
dynamic and developmental nature of the theory is further 
explicated in Introduction to: Type® Dynamics and Develop- 
ment (Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994) and in other works that focus 
on specific aspects of dynamics and development (Corlett 
&amp; Millner, 1993; Quenk, 1993). 


A Brief History of Type Theory 


When the term type theory is used in this manual, it refers to 
Jungs theory as interpreted by Isabel Myers and Katharine 
Briggs in the MBT! personality inventory. Jungian type the- 
ory was developed over a period of many years. Jung gradu- 
ally refined the descriptive elements of the system and the 
dynamic interactions of the elements. Myers and Briggs fur- 
ther refined the approach in providing detailed, neutral 
descriptions of the types as well as in clarifying the rationale 
underlying the dynamic interactions hypothesized. 


Jungs Initial Focus 
on Extraversion and Introversion 


Jungs attempt to explain individual differences in personal- 
ity initially stemmed from his observation that there were 
two types of people, extraverts and introverts. He described 
extraverts as those whose energies are primarily oriented 
outwardly toward people and events in their external envi- 
ronment and introverts as those whose energies are directed 
inwardly toward thoughts and experiences in their inner 
environment. His identification of these two types led to the 
detailed and broad-ranging descriptions of extraversion and 
introversion that he later described in Psychological Types 
(1921/1971). Jung saw extraversion and introversion as 
two different attitudes, with the term attitude defined as “a 
readiness of the psyche to act or react in a certain way ... 
having an attitude is synonymous with an a priori orienta- 
tion to a definite thing" (1921/1971, p. 414).! About 10 
years after his initial studies of extraversion and introver- 
sion, Jung noted that these two types did not provide a 
complete picture of what he observed. He stated, 


What struck me now was the undeniable fact [that] while peo- 
ple may be elassed as introverts or extraverts, this does not 
account for the tremendous differences between individuals in 
either class. So great, indeed, are these differences that I was 
forced to doubt whether | had observed correctly in the first 
place. It took nearly ten years of observation and comparison 
to clear up this doubt. (1921/1971, p. 535) 


The Addition of the Four Functions 


During those 10 years, Jung subdivided his initial extravert 
and introvert types into eight types by identifying two pairs 
of opposite mental functions: two opposite perceiving func- 
tions, sensation Cealled Sensing by Myers and Briggs) versus 


intuition; and two opposite judging functions, thinking ver- 
sus fecling.* As stated in Chapter 1, perceiving refers to the 
gathering of information, and judging refers to the manner 
with which we come to conclusions about what we perceive. 
The specific meaning of each of these functions will be dis- 
cussed later in this chapter. Jung defined a function as ^a par- 
ticular form of psyehie activity that remains the same in prin- 
ciple under varying conditions" ( Jung, 1921/1971, p. 436). 

Jung further specified which of the two attitudes of extra- 
version and introversion was likely to be habitually used in 
conjunction with the dominant mental function in an indi- 
vidual. The term dominant function refers to the function— 
Sensing, Intuition, Thinking, or Feeling—that is likely to be 
used most enthusiastically, most often, and with the great- 
est confidence. The dominant function ean be viewed as 
directing, or "dominating," the personality. 

The addition of the pairs ol functions to the two initial 
attitude types led to Jungs specification of the following 
eight types in Psychological Types (1921/1971). 


Extraverts with dominant sensing 
Introverts with dominant sensing 
Extraverts with dominant intuition 
Introverts with dominant intuition 
Extraverts with dominant thinking 
Introverts with dominant thinking 
Extraverts with dominant feeling 
Introverts with dominant feeling 


Jungs system thus defined eight dominant types. They are 
briefly described in Table 3.1. 


The Addition of the 
Judging-Perceiving (]-P) Dichotomy 


In developing the MBTI, Myers and Briggs built on state- 
ments by Jung that related to the way Jung believed the 
functions interacted, that is, the dynamic charaeter of the 
model. They extended Jungs model by adding the J-P 
dichotomy, thereby making explicit one aspect of the the- 
ory that was implicit but undeveloped in Jungs work. 
Specifically, they built upon Jungs description of an auxil- 
iary function that supported and complemented the domi- 
nant function in every type. The addition of the J-P 
dichotomy in the MBTI identified the dominant and auxil- 
iary functions for cach type.? Thus Jungs model was refined 
so as to describe 16 types: 


Extraverts with dominant Sensing and auxiliary Thinking 
Extraverts with dominant Sensing and auxiliary Feeling 
Introverts with dominant Sensing and auxiliary Thinking 
Introverts with dominant Sensing and auxiliary Feeling 
Extraverts with dominant Intuition and auxiliary Thinking 
Extraverts with dominant Intuition and auxiliary Feeling 
Introverts with dominant Intuition and auxiliary Thinking 
Introverts with dominant Intuition and auxiliary Feeling 


Table 3.1 


Dominant Extraverted Sensing 


Dominant Introverted Sensing 


Dominant Extraverted Intuition 


Dominant Introverted Intuition 


Dominant Extraverted Thinking 


Dominant Introverted Thinking 


Dominant Extraverted Feeling 


Dominant Introverted Feeling 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 


—— € ——MÀ M — $t. 





The Eight Jungian Functions 


Directing energy outwardly and acquiring information by focusing on a detailed, accurate 
accumulation of sensory data in che present 


Directing energy inwardly and storing the facts and details of both external reality and internal 
thoughts and experiences 


Directing energy outwardly to scan for new ideas, interesting patterns, and future possibilities 


Directing energy inwardly to focus on unconscious images, connections, and patterns that 
create inner vision and insight 


Seeking logical order to the external environment by applying clarity, goal-directedness, 
and decisive action 


Seeking accuracy and order in internal thoughts through reflecting on and developing a logical 
system for understanding 


Seeking harmony through organizing and structuring the environment to meet people's needs 
and their own values 


Seeking intensely meaningful and complex inner harmony through sensitivity to their own and 


23 


others' inner values and outer behavior 





B Extraverts with dominant Thinking and auxiliary Sensing 
B Extraverts with dominant Thinking and auxiliary Intuition 
B [ntroverts with dominant Thinking and auxiliary Sensing 
@ [ntroverts with dominant Thinking and auxiliary Intuition 
B Extraverts with dominant Feeling and auxiliary Sensing 
B Extraverts with dominant Feeling and auxiliary Intuition 
@ Introverts with dominant Fecling and auxiliary Sensing 
B Introverts with dominant Fecling and auxiliary Intuition 


The Dynamic Character of 
Type Theory and the MBTI 


In developing type theory, Jung, Myers, and Briggs were 
constantly attentive to the dynamic character of the per- 
sonality types they were describing. The richness, depth, 
and hreadth of their descriptive systems result from the 
dynamic interplay of the functions and attitudes inherent 
in each type. It is important to bear this in mind in apply- 
ing type theory and interpreting the MBTI personality 
inventory. 

When people are introduced to ihe MBTI, the parts of 
the theory—the four type dichotomies, E-I, S-N, T-F, and 
]-P—are generally explained first. Because these parts are 
interesting and useful in themselves, many people stop at 
this level of understanding. In doing so, they miss thc 
broader implications and applications that are intrinsic to 
the dynamic character of the MBTI. Explaining the parts 
that contribute to the whole is, however, a necessary step in 
arriving at an understanding of the dynamics of type. The 
following discussion focuses on the four dichotomies of thc 
MBTI. 





The Four Functions 


The essence of Jungs comprehensive theory of type is that 
everyone uscs four basic mental functions, or processes, that 
are called Sensing (S), Intuition (N), Thinking (T), and Fecl- 
ing (F). These four functions are essential for daily living. 
The 16 types differ in the priorities given to cach function 
and in the attitudes of Extraversion (E) and Introversion (I) 
in which they typically use each function. These differences 
in priorities and attitudes of energy (E or I) account for the 
different interactions among the functions that occur in each 
of the 16 types. This and the next chapter describe the dis- 
tinctive dynamics and development of each type. 

The four functions postulated by Jung—Sensing, Intu- 
ition, Thinking, and Feeling—represent functions as they 
are related to consciousness. This means that any one of the 
four functions can be conscious in a particular individual. 
The function that is most conscious or dominant, that is, 
that has the greatest amount of conscious energy at its com- 
mand, determines the degree of consciousness of the other 
three. For example, if Sensing is the dominant, most con- 
scious function, the opposite, Intuition, will be the least 
conscious. Thinking and Feeling will be somewhere be- 
tween Sensing and Intuition in available energy. The same 
principle applies when Intuition, Thinking, or Fecling has 
the largest share of psychological energy or attention. 

Jungs concept of the four functions grew from his 
empirical observations over many years: Jung concluded, “I 
distinguish these functions from one another because they 
cannot be related or reduced to one another" (1921/I971, 


24 Theory 


p. 437). Type theory assumes, therefore, that many aspects 
of conscious mental activity can be subsumed under one of 
these four categories. 


Use of the Terms Perception and Judgment 


To understand Jungs theory it is important to appreciate the 
uses of the terms perception and judgment. 

Perception means all the ways of becoming aware of 
things, people, events, or ideas. It includes information 
gathering, the seeking of sensation or of inspiration, and 
the selection of a stimulus to attend to. 

Judgment means all the ways of coming to conclusions 
about what has been perceived. It includes evaluation, 
choice, decision making, and the selection of a response 
after perceiving a stimulus. 


Two Kinds of Perception: 
Sensing (S) and Intuition (N) 


Jung divided all perceiving activities into two categories— 
sensation and intuition. He called these irrational functions, 
by which he meant that they are attuned to the flow of 
events and operate most broadly when not constrained by 
rational direction. Freely experiencing a flood of sensations 
with no attempt to limit or select amongst them is an illus- 
tration of sensing as an irrational function. During such a 
state of free receptivity, sensations flow freely with no 
attempt to evaluate them. The technique of brainstorming 
illustrates intuition in the irrational sense. During brain- 
storming, inspirations are encouraged to flow freely, with- 
out the constraint of criticism or appraisal. 


Sensing (S) Sensing refers to perceptions observable by way 
of the senses. Sensing establishes what exists. Because the 
senses can bring to awareness only what is occurring in the 
present moment, persons orierited toward Sensing tend to 
locus on the immediate experiences available to their five 
senses. They therefore often develop characteristics 
associated with this awareness, such as enjoyment of the 
present moment, realism, acute powers ol observation, 
memory for the dctails of both past and present experiences, 
and practicality. Persons oriented to Sensing may become so 
intent on observing and experiencing the present moment 
that they do not sufficiently attend to future possibilities. 


Intuition (N) Intuition refers to perception of possibilities, 
incanings, and relationships by way of insight. Jung char- 
acterized intuition as perception by way of the unconscious. 
Intuition may come to the surface of consciousness as a 
“hunch” or as a sudden discovery of a pattern in seemingly 
unrelated events. Intuition permits pereeption beyond what 
is visible to the senses, including possible future events. 
People who prefer Intuition may develop the characteristics 
that can follow from that emphasis and become imagina- 
tive, theoretical, abstract, future oriented, and original or 
creative.” Persons oriented toward Intuition may also 


become so intent on pursuing possibilities that they 
overlook actualities. 


An Example of Sensing Versus Intuition The difference 
between the two perceiving functions can be illustrated by 
the example of an apple. When the Sensing function is used 
to perceive an apple, a person might describe it as “juicy,” 
“crisp,” “red,” or “white with black seeds.” The focus is on 
the sensory attributes of the apple. When the Intuitive 
function is used to perceive the same apple, a person may 
say “William Tell,” “How to keep the doctor away,” “Roast 
pig." or “My grandmothers famous pie." Here the focus is 
on the associations and possible meanings stimulated by the 


apple. 


Two Kinds of Judgment: 
Thinking (T) and Feeling (F) 


Jung used the terms thinking and feeling in specialized ways 
to refer to the rational functions, functions that can be per- 
sonally directed and are in accord with the Jaws of reason. 
These rational judging functions appraise or evaluate per- 
ceptions; Thinking and Feeling judgments act as constraints 
or limits on the free flow of the sensations or intuitions 
received by the two irrational perceiving functions, which 
are focused entirely on the general flux of events. 


Thinking Judgment (T) Thinking is the function that comes 
to a decision by linking ideas together through logical 
connections, Thinking relies on principles of cause and effect 
and tends to be objective and impersonal in the application 
of reason to a decision. The focus of attention of Thinking 
judgment is on the Sensing or Intuitive information relevant 
to making the particular decision at hand. Thinking 
judgment relies on impartiality and neutrality with respect to 
the personal desires and values of both the decision maker 
and the people who may be affected by the decision. Persons 
who are primarily oriented toward Thinking are likely to 
develop characteristics associated with this way of arriving at 
conclusions: analytical inclination, objectivity, concern with 
principles of justice and fairness, criticality, an impassive and 
dispassionate demeanor, and an orientation to time that is 
linear, that is, concerned with connections from the past 
through the present and toward the future. 


Feeling Judgment (F) Feeling is the function by which one 
comes to decisions by weighing relative values and merits of 
the issues. Feeling relies on an understanding of personal 
values and group values; thus itis more subjective than 
Thinking. Nevertheless, “Feeling, like thinking, is a rational 
function, since values in general are assigned according to 
the laws of reason" (Jung, 1921/1971, p. 435). Because 
values are subjective and personal, persons making 
judgments with the Feeling function are more likely to be 
attuned to the values and feelings of others as well as to 
their own values and feelings. They try to understand 


people and to anticipate and take into account the effects of 
the decision at hand on the people involved and on what is 
important to them. They have a concern with the human as 
opposed to the technical aspects of problems, a desire for 
affiliation, warmth, and harmony, and a time orientation 
that includes preservation of enduring values. The focus on 
subjective values renders the process of making a Feeling 
judgment less directly observable than the linear, logical 
process of making a Thinking judgment. As a result, Feeling 
types may be at a disadvantage when asked to "justify" their 
judgments from the point of view of logic alone. 

Ahhough the classical distinction in psychology between 
"tough-minded" and "tender-minded" people is one aspect 
of the T-F difference, it does not follow that "thinking" 
people do not have "feelings" or that “feeling” people can- 
not follow a logical argument. Such erroneous views reflect 
two of the common misconceptions about people who 
favor one or the other of the two judging functions. Equat- 
ing Feeling as a decision-making process with feeling as 
affect or emotion is also a common misperception. In this 
regard, Jung stated, “Feeling is distinguishable from affect 
by the fact that it produces no perceptible physical innerva- 
tions, i.e., neither more nor less than an ordinary thinking 
process" (1921/1971, p. 434). 


An Example of Thinking Versus Feeling Decision Making 
An example of the difference between using Thinking 
judgment and using Feeling judgment is the following: 

In making a decision about which of five employees 
should be promoted to a supervisory position, the Thinking 
decision process would very likely involve developing a set 
of explicit criteria, ranking the criteria relative to their 
importance to the decision, and rating each of the five 
employees accordingly. After deciding which candidate or 
candidates best met the criteria, a Thinking type might or 
might not use the less-preferred Feeling function to consider 
other factors such as personal style, acceptability to other 
employees, and the employees personal circumstances. 
Such considerations might aid decision making when a 
choice must be made between equally logical alternatives. 
Attending to these more subjective issues might also allow 
the decision maker to see whether any of these factors 
might have a significant negative impact on the logical 
choice. 

A Feeling decision night focus initially on the qualifica- 
tions for the job, including impact on other workers and per- 
sonal circumstances of the five employees, determining 
whether the best candidate or candidates stood out clearly as 
a result of this weighing of values. If two or more appropriate 
candidates resulted from this process, the Feeling type 
might use the less-preferred Thinking function to develop a 
set of objective criteria to aid in final decision making. If 
only one candidate was clearly outstanding, objective crite- 
ria would be applied to ensure that nothing important was 
overlooked, as well as to facilitate a smooth and harmo- 
nious transition for all employees affected by the decision. 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 25 


-== = -o m MM — —— 





The Roles of the Functions 


The four functions direct conscious mental activity toward 
different goals: 


B Sensing (S) secks the fullest possible experience of what 
is immediate and real. 

B Intuition (N) seeks the furthest reaches of the possible 
and imaginative. 

@ Thinking (T) seeks rational order in accord with the 
nonpersonal logic of cause and effect. 

B Feeling (F) seeks rational order in accord with the cre- 
ation and maintenance of harmony among important 
subjective values. 


The key to the dynamics of the theory lies in the assump- 
tion that the four functions have different arcas of special- 
ization and therefore pull in different directions, toward dit- 
ferent domains of mental activity. If all functions exerted 
equal weight, the personality would be at cross-purposes, 
lacking in consistent direction. To compare a personality to 
a ship at sca, we take it for granted that a ship needs a cap- 
tain with undisputed authority to set the course and bring 
the ship safely to port. The ship would never reach its desti- 
nation if each person at the helm in turn aimed at a different 
destination and altered course accordingly. In type theory, 
one of the four functions is the favorite, or dominant, func- 
tion. This dominant function serves as the “captain” of the 
personality. It determines what is the necessary direction to 
reach the desired destination and keeps the ship “on 
course.” The other functions are important but are subordi- 
nate to and serve the goals of the dominant function. 

In Jungian terms, the dominant function has the largest 
share of the available psychic energy under its control. In 
the hierarchy of the functions, the auxiliary, tertiary, and 
inferior functions have proportionally less energy available 
that the individual can direct and control. 


The Four Attitudes or Orientations 


Understanding the way in which the dominant and other 
functions interrelate in cach type requires an explanation of 
the Extraversion-Introversion (E-I) and Judging-Perceiving 
( J-P) dichotomies, the two pairs of attitudes or orientations 
in type theory. This section explains these dichotomies. 


Two Kinds of Energy— 
Extraversion and Introversion 


A major portion of Jungs Psychological Types (1921/1971) is 
devoted to the historical development and description of the 
concepts of extraversion and introversion. These are scen as 
complementary attitudes or orientations of energy. The 
nature and extent of differences between extraversion and 
introversion translate into profoundly different approaches 
to or orientations toward life. 


26 Iheory 


The Extraverted Attitude (E) In the Extraverted attitude, 
energy and attention flow out, or are drawn out, to the 
objects and people in the environment. The individual 
experiences a desire to act on the environment, to affirm its 
importance, to increase its effect. Persons habitually taking 
the Extraverted attitude may develop some or all of the 
characteristics associated with Extraversion: awareness of 
and reliance on the environment for stimulation and 
guidance; an eagerness to interact with the outer world; an 
action-oriented, sometimes impulsive way of meeting life; 
openness to new experiences; ease of communication and 
sociability; and a desire to “talk things out.” 


The Introverted Attitude (l) In the Introverted attitude, 
energy is drawn from the environment toward inner 
experience and reflection. One desires to stay focused on the 
internal, subjective state, to affirm its value, and to maintain 
this focus as long as possible. The main interests of the 
Introverted type are in the world of concepts, ideas, and 
inner experiences. Persons habitually taking the Introverted 
attitude may develop some or all of the characteristics 
associated with Introversion: interest in the clarity of 
concepts, ideas, and recollected experience; reliance on 
enduring concepts and experiences more than on transitory 
external events or fleeting ideas; a thoughtful, contemplative 
detachment; an enjoyment of solitude and privacy; and a 
desire to “think things out” before talking about them. 

To many laypeople, the term extraverted means sociable, 
and introverted means shy.’ Jungs concept is different from 
and much broader than the laypersons view. Seen as differ- 
ent orientations of energy, a preference for Extraversion or 
Introversion identifies the direction in which a persons 
energies typically flow, outward or inward. Extraverts are 
seen as having more energy directed toward the outer 
world, with correspondingly less energy available for inner 
activities. Introverts are seen as, having more energy directed 
toward the inner world, with correspondingly less energy 
available for activities in the outer world. The comfort with 
and amount of time devoted to each orientation of energy 
by individuals results in two recognizable variants of nor- 
mal human personality—Extraverts and Introverts. These 
types of people have been recognized throughout history 
and literature, each making major contributions to society. 
Myers descriptions of Extraverts and Introverts reflect the 
complex, multifaceted nature of Jungs conception. 


Two Attitudes or Orientations to the 
Outer World—Judging (J) and Perceiving (P) 


No explicit mention is made by Jung regarding a judging 
versus perceiving attitude? or orientation toward the outer- 
world. Katharine Briggs described such a type classification. 
in her unpublished work prior to the publication of Jungs 
work. She observed that some people habitually use judg- 
ment in interacting with the outer, extraverted world, being 
likely to come to conclusions and achieve closure quickly. 


These people were identified later by Myers and Briggs as 
people with a Judging attitude. Briggs described other peo- 
ple as habitually interacting with the outer world using per- 
ceiving, liking to continue gathering information as long as 
possible before comfortably coming to closure. These peo- 
ple were identified later as having a Perceiving attitude. 
Katharine Briggs' work in conjunction with Jungs incom- 
plete discussion of this area formed the basis for the J-P for- 
mulation used in the MBTI. 

The J-P dichotomy has two uses. First, in conjunction 
with the E-I dichotomy, it is used to identify which of the 
two preferred functions is the leading or dominant function 
and which is the auxiliary function. Second, it describes 
identifiable attitudes or orientations to the outer world. The 
recognition and development of the character of the J-P 
dichotomy are a major contribution of Briggs and Myers to 
the theory of psychological types. 

The concept of the J-P attitude was derived over a period 
of several decades, before any MBTI items were written. 
Myers’ observation ol different behavioral patterns formed 
the basis for the J-P distinction. Behaviors characteristic of 
persons who used either Thinking or Feeling in their outer 
life (i.e., who extraverted one of the judgment functions) 
formed the basis for the Judging pole of the J-P dichotomy. 
Behaviors characteristic of persons who used either Sensing 
or Intuition in their outer life (i.e., who extraverted a per- 
ceiving function) formed the basis of the Perceiving pole of 
the J-P dichotomy. One of the most overloohed characteristics 
of the J-P dichotomy is that it describes the orientation to the 
outer or extraverted world for every type. Others readily 
notice how people behave in the outer world and, as a result, 
often recognize someone as having a Judging or a Perceiving 
attitude relatively early on in the acquaintance. 

In any new activity, it is appropriate first to use a perceiv- 
ing function (S or N) to observe or take in the situation; then 
it is appropriate to use a judging function (T or F) to decide 
on the appropriate action. Perceiving types typically remain 
longer in the observing attitude because it is more comfort- 
able and natural for them. Judging types move more quickly 
through perception in order to reach conclusions and achieve 
closure, as they are most comfortable and satisfied when a 
plan has been developed or when a decision has been made. 


The Judging Attitude (J) In the Judging attitude, a person 
is concerned with making decisions, seeking closure, 
planning operations, or organizing activities. For Thinking 
Judging (TJ) types, the decisions and plans are more likely 
to be based on logical analysis; for Feeling Judging (FJ) 
types, the decisions and plans are more likely to be based on 
weighing and assessing values. But for both TJ and FJ 
people, who characteristically live in the Judging (J) 
attitude, perception tends to be shut off as soon as they have 
observed enough to make a decision. In contrast, people 
who prefer the Perceiving attitude will often suspend 
judgment to take another look, reporting, “We don't know 
enough yet to make a decision.” People who prefer Judging 


often seem in their outer behavior to be organized, 
purposeful, and decisive, frequently stating, “Yes, we do 
have enough information to make this decision." 

Procrastination can be the result of perception with a 
deficit of judgment. Prejudice can come from judgment 
with a deficit of perception. People new to the MBTI some- 
times erroneously assume that Judging types are necessarily 
judgmental. hi is important to understand that Judging refers 
to decision making, the exercise of judgment, and is a valu- 
able and indispensable tool. It is also important to distin- 
guish between a preference for using a Perceiving function 
in the outer world (P) and perceptiveness. Just as ] types 
should not be assumed to be judgmental, P types should 
not be assumed to be especially discerning. 

A source of confusion for many people learning about 
the MBTI is the fact that Judging includes both Thinking 
and Feeling and Perceiving includes both Sensing and Intu- 
ition. Figure 3.1 shows this relationship. 


The Perceiving Attitude (P) In the Perceiving attitude, a 
person is attuned to incoming information. For Sensing 
Perceiving (SP) types the information is more likely to be the 
immediate realities in the environment, what is happening 
and is observable. For Intuitive Perceiving (NP) types the 
information is more likely to be new ideas, interesting 
patterns, and future possibilities. But for both SP and NP 
types, the Perceiving attitude is open, curious, and interested. 
Persons who characteristically live in the Perceiving attitude 
seem in their outer behavior to be spontaneous, curious, 
adaptable, and open to what is new and changeable. Their 
aim is to receive information as long as possible in an effort to 
miss nothing that might be important. 


TheTheory of Type Development 


An important aspect of Jungs type theory is its focus on the 
development of personality throughout the life span. There 
is a hierarchy of functions that describes an individuals per- 
sonality at any stage of life. This hierarchy of dominant, aux- 
iliary, tertiary, and inferior functions permits and encourages 
the kind of development and adaptation that is likely to be 
most useful for an individual at each stage of life. 


Type Development During Childhood 


Type theory assumes that children are born with a predispo- 
sition to prefer some functions to others. Children are most 
interested in their preferred functions. They are motivated to 
exercise their dominant function and to a somewhat lesser 
extent their auxiliary function, becoming more skillful, 
adept, and differentiated in their use. Jung described a differ- 
entiated function as one that is separate and exists by itself, 
so that it can operate on its own without being mixed up 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 27 


Judging (J) Perceiving (P) 
Thinking Feeling Sensing Intuition 


Figure 3.1 The J-P Dichotomy 


Source. From Introduction to Type (6th ed., p 6). by I. B Myers, with L. K. Kirby &amp; K D. Myers, 1998 Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. Used with permission. 


with or contaminated by any other function (1921/1971). A 
sense af competence comes from exercising a function well, 
and with the reinforcement of constant practice these func- 
tions become more controlled and trustworthy. The pleasure 
of using preferred functions generalizes to other activities 
requiring use of the functions and leads to the surface traits, 
behaviors, and skills associated with these functions. 

While this development of preferred functions is occur- 
ring, there is relative neglect of the opposite functions. In 
this sequence of events, for example, a child who prefers 
Sensing perception and a child who prefers Intuitive per- 
ception will develop along divergent lines. Each will 
become relatively differentiated in an area in which the 
other remains undifferentiated. Both channel their interests 
and energies into activities that give them a chance to use 
their minds in the ways they prefer, and each acquires a set 
of surface traits that grows out of the basic preferences. 


Type Development During 
Adolescence and Adulthood 


Asa child becomes an adolescent and then an adult, contin- 
ued exercise of the dominant and auxiliary functions pro- 
motes further enjoyment, development, and differentiation 
of them as compared with their opposite inferior and ter- 
tiary functions. For example, a person who develops Sens- 
ing in a highly differentiated way is likely to become an 
astute observer of the immediate environment. In the 
process, the person acquires some of the characteristics 
assumed to follow from this acute awareness: realism, prac- 
ticality, and common sense. While paying attention to thc 
specifics of the environment, the person spends less time 
and energy using Intuition, which is the perceiving func- 
tion opposite to Sensing. Focusing on the present (S) gives 
people who prefer the Sensing function less time for focus- 
ing on the future (N); focusing on the concrete (S) gives 
them less energy for focusing on the abstract (N); focusing 
on practical applications (S) gives them less interest in the- 
oretical issues (N); and focusing on reality (S) gives them 
less time for focusing on the imaginary or fanciful (N). 


Type Development over the Life Span 


Type development is seen as a lifelong process of gaining 
greater command over the functions or powers of percep- 
tion and judgment. For each type, two ol the four functions 


28 Theory 


are assumed to be more interesting and more likely to be 
consciously developed and used. The two less-preferred 
functions are assumed to be less interesting and are likely to 
be relatively neglected. Development comes from striving 
for excellence in those functions that hold the greatest 
interest and from becoming at least passable in the other 
less interesting but essential functions. 

In youth and adulthood, the task is to develop the first 
(leading, or dominant) and the second (auxiliary) functions. 
The theory assumes that these innate, natural functions are 
best suited to helping a person find a comfortable and effec- 
tive place in the world—the task of youth and adulthood. 
"Specializing" by devoting a great deal of energy to ones 
dominant and auxiliary functions is therefore appropriate 
during the first half of life. During midlife, people appear to 
be naturally motivated toward completing their personali- 
ties through gradually adding the previously neglected ter- 
tiary and inferior functions to the sphere of operation. In 
the second half of life, it is appropriate to be a “generalist” 
rather than a specialist. Development of this kind allows 
individuals to add new perspectives and experiences that 
were previously not very fulfilling to them. Giving greater 
energy and attention to the tertiary and inferior functions 
involves a corresponding lessening of energy and attention 
to the dominant and auxiliary functions. However, this 
does not involve a change in a person's type. Type theory 
assumes that type does not change over the life span. Rather, 
the expression of type may vary in accordance with differ- 
ent stages of life and different life circumstances. 

A very few exceptional persons may reach a stage of 
development at which they can use each function relatively 
easily as the situation requires. For most people, however, 
striving for a comfortable and effective expression of the 
four mental functions is an interesting and challenging life- 
long process, with no expectation that a person will arrive 
ata predetermined level of development. 


Influence of the Environment 
on Type Development 


In the type model, environment becomes extremely impor- 
tant because it can foster development of each persons nat- 
ural preferences, or it can discourage them by reinforcing 
activities that are less satisfying, less comfortable, and less 
motivating. The latter situation makes it difficult to acquire 
confidence and skill in ones natural preferences. In fact, 
environmental interference with type development can dis- 
tort or suppress a persons natural, innate type. Individuals 
to whom this occurs may become skillful in using an ini- 
tially less-preferred function but may also be less content, 
may feel less competent, or may be out of touch with their 
own best gifts. The MBTI does not necessarily reveal the 
extent to which natural development has been fostered or 
thwarted. Chapters 5 and 6 will discuss some of the strate- 
gies for helping individuals identify their true preferences. 


Rationale for a Type Development Theory 


Some people dislike the idea of a dominant function and 
prefer to think of themselves as using all the functions 
equally. Others strive for equal development of the func- 
tions, erroneously believing this to be necessary or desir- 
able. Jung said that when energy is shared equally between 
two opposite mental functions, differentiation cannot occur. 
Both functions remain undeveloped, which produces an 
unconscious “primitive mentality" in which neither func- 
tion can be directed and controlled. When a person tries to 
attend to two incompatible opposites at the same time, they 
“jam” each other and no clear signal comes through. For 
example, a person who is “pulled” equally toward Sensing 
and Intuition might focus on concrete facts in the present, 
move quickly to future possibilities, switch to an entirely 
different set of facts, and so on. Persistent vacillation among 
perceiving functions would very likely produce confusion 
and frustration for the individual. At the point at which a 
decision needs to be made based on available information, 
Sensing facts and Intuitive possibilities may be indistin- 
guishable from one another. Thus, if either one of a pair of 
functions is to develop, the other must be shut off most of 
the time to give the person a chance to gain experience and 
confidence in the natural, preferred function. 

In Jungian typology, therefore, optimum use of the four 
functions is to be obtained not through equality but rather 
through selective development of each function in propor- 
tion both to its relative importance to the individual and to 
its useful relationship to the other processes. The general 
goal of development is to 


m Become differentiated with the preferred functions— 
adequately develop a dominant, most-conscious func- 
tion used primarily in the preferred attitude, and a bal- 
ancing and somewhat less conscious auxiliary function 
used primarily in the less-preferred attitude. 

B Eventually admit the least-developed processes to con- 
scious, purposeful use in the service of the dominant 
process and for selected tasks or for limited periods of 
time. This use may require the dominant and auxiliary 
functions to temporarily relinquish control in conscious- 
ness so that the third or fourth function can become 
more accessible. 

m Use each of the functions for the tasks for which they are 
best fitted. For example, a dominant Intuitive type may 
find that using her inferior Sensing is the most effective 
way of handling important financial records; a dominant 
Thinking type may find employees to be less resistant to 
organizational change when they are given an opportu- 
nity to voice personal concerns and issues. 


The Universality of Type 


The growing evidence regarding the biological basis of psy- 
chological type, which is described in detail in Chapter 9, 
gives credence to Jungs assumption that type is universal, 





that is, that the personalities of all human beings are struc- 
tured in accordance with type dichotomies. Support for 
universality comes from the fact that many translations of 
the MBTI are being used successfully and many more are 
being developed. Users in other countries and cultures 
report excellent results in applying personality type con- 
cepts. All four dichotomies and all 16 types are recognized 
in other countries and cultures. However, the way the 
opposite preferences in each dichotomy are expressed in 
other cultures may vary considerably from the way they are 
expressed in U.S. culture. A discussion of this and related 
issues regarding the universality of type can be found in 
Chapter 14. 


The Dynamic Interaction 
of the Preferences 


When people respond to the items on the MBTI assessment 
tool, thev are not only casting votes for Extraversion (E) or 
Introversion (1), Sensing (S) or Intuition (N), Thinking (T) 
or Feeling (F), and Judging (J) or Perceiving (P); they are 
also providing the information needed to form à hypothesis 
about their type dynamics. Each four-letter type stands for a 
complex set of dynamic relationships among the functions 
(S, N, T, and F), the attitudes (E and D), and the attitude or 
orientation to the outer world (J and P). The letters in any 
type appear in this order: E or 1, Sor N, Tor EJ or P. All 16 
possible combinations of letters occur—EST], ISEP, INFJ, 
ENTP and so on. 


The Jungian Basis for Type Dynamics 


Jungs recognition of the dynamic character of his typol- 
ogy evolved over time, and the amount of detail he pro- 
vided about its various elements varied considerably. He 
first (1921/1971) described eight preference types, focus- 
ing on the dominant function of each and the attitude (E 
or I) in which the dominant function was typically used. 
Jung described but did not go into great detail concerning 
the need for a secondary function “whose nature is differ- 
ent from, but not antagonistic to, the primary function" 
(Jung, 1921/1971, p. 406). According to Jung, every type 
has an “auxiliary function which is in every respect differ- 
ent from the nature of the primary function." From these 
statements, Myers and Briggs reasoned that the auxiliary 
function is oriented to the less-preferred attitude. Indeed, 
there are several references in Jungs writing to the three 
remaining functions having an opposite attitudinal charac- 
ter. For example, in writing about introverts with thinking 
dominant (p. 387), Jung commented that the counterbal- 
ancing functions (that is, auxiliary, tertiary, and inferior 
functions) have an extraverted character. Myers and Briggs 
therefore assumed the following: 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 29 





BM For each type, one function will lead, or be dominant. 
This is the first function. 

B Members of each type will mainly use their first function 
in their favorite attitude. That is, Extraverts use the first 
function mainly in the outer world of Extraversion; 
Introverts use the first function mainly in the introverted 
world of concepts, ideas, and inner experience. 

B In addition to the first, or dominant, function, a second, 
or auxiliary, function will be developed to provide balance. 

B The auxiliary function provides balance between Extra- 
version and Introversion. For Extraverts, the first, or 
dominant, function will be extraverted, and the second, 
or auxiliary, function will typically be used in the inner 
world. For Introverts, the first, or dominant, function 
will be introverted, and the second, or auxiliary, function 
will typically be used in the outer world. With the auxil- 
iary, or sccond, function, thercforc, a person develops com- 
fort and facility in living in both the outer world and the 
inner world. 


Notice that in this model, Extraverts show their first, or 
best, function to the outside world; Introverts show their 
sccond-best function to the outside world, saving their best 
function for the inner world of ideas. It follows, therefore, 
that Introverts are more likely to be underestimated in 
casual contacts. 

The fact that the second function provides balance 
between Extraversion and Introversion also provides a 
correction to a common misconception by persons new to 
type theory. Extraverts may assume that type theory says 
they never like to be alone, and Introverts may assume 
that type theory says they never like to be sociable. Type 
theory, however, assumes that everyone lives in both the 
extraverted and introverted worlds to some extent. Many 
people attain comfort and competence in both worlds, but 
for each person, one attitude is preferred over the other. A 
well-developed Introvert can deal ably with the extraverted 
world when necessary but works best, most easily, and with 
less fatigue when concentrating on concepts or inner 
experience. A similarly well-developed Extravert can deal 
effectively with concepts or inner experience but works 
with most interest, satisfaction, and energy externally in 
action. Good type development fosters the ability to 
extravert comfortably and to introvert comfortably but 
also assumes a clear and natural preference for one atti- 
tude or the other. 


B The auxiliary function also provides balance between 
perception and judgment. As specified by Jung, if the 
first function is a perceiving function (S or N), the sec- 
ond function will be a judging function (T or F). Or, if 
the first function is a judging function (T or F), the sec- 
ond function will be a perceiving function (S or N). 
When using the auxiliary function effectively, a person gains 
command of both perception and judgment, that is, of tak- 
ing in information and making decisions. 


30 Theory 


m The J-P dichotomy, as noted earlier, points to the function 
used in the extraverted attitude, for both Extraverts and 
Introverts. 

m The function opposed to the dominant function is typi- 
cally the least-developed, or inferior, function. It can also 
be referred to as the fourth function. The inferior func- 
tion tends to be used in the less-preferred attitude of 
Extraversion or Introversion. 

g The function opposite to the auxiliary function is the ter- 
tiary, or third, function. Several views regarding the atti- 
tude typically used by the tertiary function have been pro- 
posed. For the purposes of exposition and consistency 
with the 1985 Manual, we will assume that the dominant 
function operates in the preferred attitude and that the 
auxiliary, tertiary, and inferior functions all take the oppo- 
site, less-preferred attitude.’ Jungians themselves do not 
agree about some specifics of Jungs psychological type 
theory, particularly in relation to the orientation of the 
auxiliary function as identified by the J-P dichotomy.’ 


These assumptions make it possible to use the type let- 
ters to identify the first (dominant), second (auxiliary), 
third (tertiary), and fourth (inferior) functions and their 
typical attitudes for each of the 16 types. 


Identifying the Dynamics of Each Type 


The four letters of type show the preference order (see also 
Table3.2). 


First letter: preference for the Extraverted (E) or Intro- 
verted (1) attitude of energy 


Second letter: preference for Sensing (S) or Intuitive 
(N) perception 

Third letter: preference for Thinking (T) or Feeling (F) 
judgment 


Fourth letter: preference for a Judging (J) or Perceiving 
(P) attitude toward the outer, extraverted world 


Remember that for any type, the middle two letters iden- 
tify the dominant and auxiliary functions. The following sec- 
tion presents a straightforward way to determine the dynam- 
ics of type for any four-letter type. 


Steps for Identifying 
the Hierarchy of Functions 


Step |: The first step is to look at the last letter of the type, J 
or P. It will tell us whether a judging function (T or F) ora 
perceiving function (S or N) is typically extraverted in that 
type. For example, for EST], the J shows that the judging 
function is extraverted. The judging function preferred by 
an EST] is Thinking. The J in the formula points to Think- 
ing as the extraverted function for EST]. As a reminder of 
this fact, we put a small ¢ beside the T in EST]. 


EST, | 





Table 3.2 Positions of the Preferences 








E-I S-N T-F J-P 
Perceiving Judging 

Attitudes Functions Functions Attitudes 

Extraversion or Sensing or Thinking or Judging or 

Introversion Intuition Feeling Perceiving 


Step 2: For the second step, we remember that in type 
dynamics, one function is extraverted and the other func- 
tion is introverted. For EST], we know that T is the 
extraverted function. The remaining middle letter is S, so 5 
must be the introverted function. As a reminder, we put a 
small , beside the S. 


3 
The type can now be shown as follows: 


ESTE] 


Step 3: For the third step, we remember that the first letter 
tells us which attitude is preferred and thus the attitude in 
which the types dominant function is used. We therefore 
look at the first letter of the type. We see that for ES,Tẹg]J it 
is E. It tells us that EST] extraverts the dominant function. 


Step 4: The fourth step looks at the function that has an g 
beside it. For ES(TpJ it is T. We can now match that p with 
the first letter, E. This match tells us that the dominant 
function of ES(Tr] is T, Thinking. 


Step 5: We identify the auxiliary function by default—it is 
the other middle letter, Sj, Sensing, and the small , beside it 
reminds us that it is introverted. 

To complete the dynamics of EST], we turn our attention 
to the two type function letters that do not appear in the 
type—N and E We know that one of these will be the ter- 
tiary function and the other the inferior function. Two sim- 
ple rules are all that is needed: The tertiary function is oppo- 
site to the auxiliary function, and the inferior function is 
opposite to the dominant function. Therefore, for EST]: 

N (Intuition) is the tertiary function. Following the con- 
vention in the 1985 Manual, we specily its attitude as intro- 
verted, the same as for the auxiliary function. 

F (Feeling) is the inferior function. The inferior function 
takes the attitude opposite to the dominant function. For 
ES) T,J, introverted Feeling is the inferior function. 


Example of Identifying 
the Hierarchy of Functions 


The same five steps are used for all types. Here is an illustra- 
tion for an Introverted type, INFP. 


IST) 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ISTP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ESTP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


EST) 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ISF) 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ISFP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ESFP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ESF) 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


INFJ 
DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


INFP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ENFP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ENF} 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


The Theory Behind the MBTI 





INTJ 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


INTP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ENTP 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


ENT) 


DOMINANT 
AUXILIARY 
TERTIARY 


inferior 


3l 





Step |: Identifying the Function That Is Extraverted The last 
letter tells us that INFP extraverts the preferred perceiving 
function, N, so we put a small y beside the N. 
Y 4 
INEFP rr 

S 
Step 2: Identifying the Function That Is Introverted Put a 
small , beside the F (remembering that if one middle letter 
is extraverted, the remaining one is introverted). 


INcF,P 


Step 3: Matching with the First Letter Look at the first letter, 
I, which tells us that INFP prefers the Introverted attitude 
and therefore introverts the dominant function. Feeling is 
therefore the dominant function because it is the one that is 
introverted. 


INcF,P 
Step 4: Identifying the Auxiliary Function Intuition, the other 


middle letter, is the auxiliary function, and it is shown as 
being extraverted. 


Step 5: Identifying the Tertiary and Inferior Functions The 
opposite of auxiliary Intuition is tertiary Sensing; the attitude is 


extraverted, the same as the auxiliary function. The opposite 
of dominant introverted Fecling is inferior extraverted Thinking. 


Understanding the Dynamics 
of the Type Description 


Once the principles and mechanical steps are grasped, one 
can figure out the type dynamics for all of the 16 types. 
Table 3.3 shows the priorities and directions of the four 
functions for each of the 16 types. When the hierarchy of 
functions has been determined, the dynamic relationships 
for a type can be understood. We will use the type ENTP as 
an example. 

ENTP is an Extravert with Intuition (N) as the domi- 
nant, extraverted function and Thinking (T) the auxiliary, 
introverted function. In theory, therefore, ENTPs trust Intu- 
ition (#1) most, use it most, develop it most, and shape 
their lives to give the maximum freedom for pursuing their 
intuitive goals. They use their Thinking (22) in pursuit of 
something challenging to their Intuition but may not let 
their Thinking (#2) veto anything their Intuition (41) seri- 
ously desires. Being oriented to the challenge of new possi- 
bilities (N #1) in the outer world (E), they may often find 
themselves committed to too many projects. Intuitive types, 
especially those who extravert their Intuition, typically 


3 


2 Theorv 


underestimate the time it takes to bring activities to com- 
pletion. When the ENTP decides there are too many activi- 
ties for the available time, the Thinking (#2) function is 
needed. The ENTP withdraws into the inner world (D, ana- 
lyzes the costs and consequences of continuing or dropping 
each activity, and makes a logical judgment (22) about 
which projects to drop. With more mature type develop- 
ment, the ENTP may learn to take time to pull back from 
the exciting challenges (N #1) for action (E) and consider 
(D whether the costs permit adding new activities (T #2) 
before taking on new commitments. 

The fourth, or inferior, function of ENTP is Sensing (#4). 
ENTPs need to train themselves not to neglect realities (#4) 
in the enthusiasm for possibilities (#1). Type theory says 
that Sensing (#4) and Feeling (#3) develop more slowly for 
an ENTP One way to develop Sensing and Feeling is on a 
project chosen by Intuition (#1). To accomplish the project 
the ENTP will need to know many facts and be able to deal 
with many practical details; thus Sensing (24) comes into 
play to help Intuition (41). Further, the project may require 
working in a team or persuading other people; thus Feeling 
(#3) also comes in to help Intuition (#1). In good type 
development, people tend to use their less-preferred func- 
tions in the service of their preferred functions, rather than 
out of attraction to the less-familiar functions themselves. 

The preceding description of the way ENTPs use their 
type dynamics should not be taken literally as a hard-and- 
fast, methodical procedure that all ENTPs follow. Rather, 
the dynamics of any particular type tend to flow naturally 
and seamlessly from function to function, usually without 
the conscious attention of the individual. 


Dynamics of Type Reflected 
in the Type Descriptions 


The descriptions of each of the types are built on the same 
kinds of dynamic principles that were shown in the descrip- 
tion of ENTP The booklets in the Introduction to Type series 
are valuable guides for describing the MBTI types. Notice 
that in the Introduction to Type booklets, descriptions for 
types with the same dominant function appear on facing 
pages. It is important to understand that the type descrip- 
tions, which may seem like horoscopes to the uninitiated, 
are firmly based on the dynamics of type theory, supple- 
mented by years of observation of the types and empirical 
results from research. 


Types Are Created by Exercise of Preferences 


Under this theory, people create their “type” by the exer- 
cise of their preferences with regard to their use of percep- 
tion and judgment. People who have the samc preferences 
tend to have in common whatever qualities result from the 
exercise of those preferences. The interests, values, needs, 
and habits of mind that naturally result tend to produce a 


recognizable kind of person. We can therefore begin to 
partly describe individuals by stating their preferences as 
ENTP. ESFJ, INFP or whatever the case may be. 

We can also begin intelligently to expect ENTPs to be 
different from others in ways characteristic of previously 
known ENTPs. To describe them as belonging to that type 
(if they agree that it is their type) in no way infringes on 
their right to be what they like. They were exercising that 
right when they found, consciously or unconsciously, that 
they liked Extraversion, Intuition, Thinking, and the Per- 
ceiving attitude. 

In dcaling with people, when we keep their type in mind, 
we are respecting not only their abstract right to develop 
along lines of their own choosing but also the importance of 
qualities they have developed by making that choice. For exam- 
ple, if, for whatever rcason, they have not exercised one or 
more of their preferences, they may not have developed a 
type, or at least a type that they can report clearly. Not every- 
one is a type. Young people in particular may respond to the 
MBTI tool at a stage when their type is just beginning to 
emerge in a way they themselves can recognize and report. 
One purpose of administering the MBTI to young people, 
including those whose type has not vet fully evolved, is to 
help familiarize them with the areas with which they may be 
struggling. Conscious awareness of the opposite poles of 
each dichotomy may enable them to clarify and gain confi- 
dence with an emerging natural preference.” 


Learning About the Types 


Once the principles of type dynamics are understood, the 
next step is to see how these dynamics play out in each of 
the 16 types. Perhaps the best way to approach this learning 
is to adopt a “typological lens” when interacting with others 
and observing them in their daily lives. Finding consisten- 
cies in the attitudes and behaviors of people of the same or 
similar types that “make typological sense" adds to ones 
depth of understanding. It can be especially helpful to ask 
people what they were focusing on in a given situation and 
how they arrived at a particular conclusion. Their response 
to such questions may or may not support a typological 
explanation and is an excellent way to differentiate 
between behaviors that are and are not legitimately type 
related. In creating the Indicator, Isabel Myers was confi- 
dent of peoples ability to report accurately about them- 
selves. That same confidence in peoples knowledge of 
themselves can greatly enhance our understanding of the 
16 types. 

Type theory seems simple, but it is in fact rich and com- 
plex. People of the same type differ in many ways. Some 
within-type differences may reflect habitual ways in which 
a person expresses aspects of less-preferred functions and 
attitudes, as indicated in the Step II Expanded Interpretive 
Report (EIR). Ones type may also be affected by social and 
cultural pressures and by the stage of type development 


reached. To truly understand type, there is no substitute for 
a prolonged period of interested skepticism in which you 
match your observations and knowledge of people with 
predictions from Jungs theory. 

Other strategies for understanding the types are de- 
scribed in the next chapter. 


Conclusion 


This chapter has placed the MBTI personality inventory in 
the context of Jungs development of the theory of psycho- 
logical types, beginning with his attempt to classify people 
into the two categories of extraverts and introverts, and his 
later addition of the two pairs of opposite functions (sensing 
versus intuition and thinking versus feeling) to his descrip- 
tive system. Myers and Briggs extended Jungs three-category 
system to include a fourth pair ol attitudes, Judging and Per- 
ceiving. The J-P dichotomy describes identifiable external 
behavior, in addition to enabling the determination of type 
dynamics. Definitions, descriptions, and examples of the 
opposite functions and attitudes and their different dynamic 


The Theorv Behind the MBTI 33 





interactions were given as illustrations of both the complex- 
ity and practical applications implicit in using the MBTI. 

Jungs notion of type development and the goals of 
development over the life span were explained and illus- 
trated, the rationale and method for determining the 
dynamics of any four-letter type were set out, and an exam- 
ple of how type dynamics emerge in one type was given in 
detail. 

In summary, the MBTI contains four separate dichoto- 
mies: E-I, S-N, T-E and J-P Two of these, S-N and T-F 
describe functions and reflect basic preferences for use of 
perception and judgment. The other two, E-I and J-P 
reflect attitudes or orientations. Together, these functions 
and orientations influence how a person perceives a situa- 
tion and decides on a course of action.{All of these choices 
are like forks in the road of human development, offering 
different paths that lead toward different kinds of excel- 
lence. How far different individuals will go, how much 
excellence they will actually achieve, depends in part upon 
their energy and aspirations. The kind of excellence toward 
which they are headed is determined, according to type the- 
ory, by the inborn preferences that direct them at each fork 
in the road.'? 


i TUL E pe LE M 45 oM vt La dp j^ D al NES T 


















































| la otn oca tlli up cor eres on P Et T aL wert DYN (qe 15r eode. vieta " "i 
acc dion og otov nte Jig Gare. a aii edd rc o Va rd. Tenit agn 
li ow sd? lh An dn ee eee i har dem tom peshyaisadi sess i 


E “sa Se ha beet aaa a d mimus, "matu 


im Ilipa nena g R Pa 15s aede» aav 6 
ey $04 : Ley “ee eee és C sme me &gt; eut us Se aay 
m 4 ibás. ^ Sushi s ae. 
&gt; Tu i à" SEE E D A CE N^ 
A T . &gt; age k” "uM te: 16&gt; - 
— Pw cad &gt; gat auis d qiu ja ise 


— ‘4 hd ea sr Cl gps (f$ cma vt 434 pa [Ir] "1 
ui * didus 28 aw epee gesitui s aram t rabo P8 e tua 
wo. 000 vtm nt fvuniumrs pum ^an Eh d Nes UR and IC 
ses vl @ í i + RÀ EERTE «39 he Nemem 7 j 
$ ^w wil ^u. 1 € (eee AM mi ULL iS Mm au ; aT" 
bon “a oo Cer and dram erent set ct lf! Mea pee 
IP a's E bd ' ann m od oe mrs ae hears fy dar t Rall yong 
ym E PIPER. i eet! LL 
jme hé h r dimisit Acme 
7 chappom — ciae — creta o! hon) ein 
h xdi ee EEN dee Imajina Fe 

; Un$* de « catis i datsoc ids iret aed eR: 
"idees ari ccce MBA 


p^ 


i. B E E - a&gt; _ E Nt Re 
es c qum xp &gt; 3 
EL + the g 





! a” PE wee 
- =- PA 'J- pl 
| A TT M c 
" = i "" we | ecc i 
f *e d | l in de qae A Cn 
D« &gt; Pi erp "Ga ed A | 
tane Nee? A 4 wh. 
in ' ne qium g^. 
" hod eee bs ied m Oe PIN LR 


» 
ie mwlv 5) Me 0g Qmm "n 


| inta gua ^t ue "Uu *4übv*«.* © 
wi’ d Qa ar X 

das peo pal! COW AX ig 

ey le (ieee s ^^ Elves 

lAa qe mdp eres Ce 

Ce ier. 1 pr 'Z 


ivre; i om arm Muss... qu AS 


nO 


ò 
TAE 
(5 tan ee ub albe tau d 
» 26 r an, X we v ete Pier An ved 

i | WT awa in quo alien iud viii 
i f | swap? TR » dq | "- x ] 


Pt Out m ? | rn 


em 9 aa | 






Understanding the 16 Types 


Using Type Tables 
to Promote Understanding 


Identifying Groupings 
of the Preferences 


Characteristics of Groupings 
of the Preferences 


Characteristics of che 16 Types 


Conclusion 


hen making practical use of type theory and 

data, it is important to consider what the theory 
leads us to expect as well as what has been observed in peo- 
ple of that type. The usefulness of feedback to any individu- 
als, groups, and organizations may depend to a large extent 
upon the interpreters knowledge of characteristics associ- 
ated with each of the 16 types. People who are new to type 
can find that keeping 16 different personalities in mind is 
rather daunting, as comfortable familiarity with the distine- 
tive qualities of the types requires considerable time and 
experience. Trying to memorize the characteristics of the 16 
types is not helpful and does not lead to an appreciation of 
the dynamic character of type. Therefore, this chapter pro- 
vides some approaches to learning about type that will help 
move practitioners from an initial focus on the four type 
dichotomies to a familiarity with and understanding of the 


complex wholes represented in the 16 types. 


39 


36 Theory 


The goal of this chapter is 10 enhance understanding of 
type differences for both new and experienced users of the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator personality inventory. The basic 
groundwork for understanding the 16 types was provided 
in Chapter 3, which explained the theoretical basis for the 
dynamic character of the types. This chapter builds on that 
knowledge in the following ways: 


B it lacilitates acquisition of knowledge through familiar- 
ity with type tables and through precision in the use of 
type language. 

B li provides descriptions of the characteristics of groupings 
of types that have two preferences in common. These 
include combinations of the functions, combinations of 
the attitudes, and attitude-function combinations. 

m By focusing first on these “building blocks" of type it is 
easier to understand and retain the qualities associated 
with dynamic whole types. 

W lt describes two-letter type combinations and whole types 
trom three perspectives: the Jung-Myers theory, careful 
observation by experienced type experts and the self- 
reports of individuals, and the most current empirical 
research. The research eited focuses on evidence relevant 
to the distinctive features of a particular grouping or whole 
type. The three-pronged approach to type deseriptions— 
theory, observation, research—ensures confidence in our 
understanding of tvpe similarities and differences in a 
wide variety of circumstances and application settings. 


A wealth of descriptive, anecdotal, and research informa- 
tion is available that describes whole types and the various 
combinations of type preferences. To facilitate learning, this 
chapter will first focus on two-letter type groupings and 
then concentrate on describing the 16 whole types. 


Using Type Tables to 
Promote Understanding 


An exeellent way to begin to understand whole types and 
particular combinations of preferences is to become famil- 
iar with the type table, which presents the 16 types ina logi- 
cal relationship. There is much to be learned from type 
tables; they show the frequencies of types in groups of peo- 
ple that have characteristics in common: for example, the 
same occupation, college major, avocation, management 
philosophy, or communication style. A wide variety of vari- 
ables of interest to researchers and practitioners can be 
explored using type tables, allowing easy visual observation 
so that hypotheses can be explored. Statistical analysis of 
type table data ensures confidence in the meaning inferred 
trom the type frequeneies observed. A common statistic 
used is the self-selection ratio (SSR), which compares the 
percentage of each type in a sample relative to its percentage 
in an appropriate base comparison group. For a detailed 
explanation of this statistic, see Chapter 9. 





Extraversion-Introversion Sensing-intuition 
Thinking-Feeling Judging-Perceiving 





Figure 4.1 Format of Type Tables 


Type theory leads us to hypothesize that the groupings of 
types on particular type tables are the result of choices that 
are directly or indirectly influenced by type preferences. For 
example, if an occupation requires attention to detail, sys- 
tem, and order and if that occupation attracts the types who 
in theory should prefer attention to detail, system, and 
order—the Sensing Judging types—then the table provides 
construct validity for type theory as well as useful infor- 
mation for career counselors. If a type table shows that 
Feeling types are rarely found in a particular high-pressure, 
product-focused company, this could help a management 
consultant explain some possible communication issues 
that are causing problems for the company. Many of the 
applications chapters in Part V of this manual present infor- 
mation and analyze data in type table form. 


Placement of Types on the Type Table 


The type table was designed by fsabel B. Myers as a way to 
highlight similarities and differences of the types by their 
placement in the table. Familiarity with the placement of 
types enables quick recognition of which types predominate 
and which are infrequent in different samples and popula- 
tions. Figure 4.1 depicts the format of type tables. Note that 
each type has three letters in common with any adjacent 
type. The placement of each of the preferences and the ratio- 
nale given by Myers for placements are described below. 





Extraverts (E) and Introverts (1) Introverted types appear 
in the first and second rows of the type table. Extraverted 
types appear in rows 3 and 4. Isabel Myers’ mnemonie aid 
for E-1 placement is that Introverts are more likely to have 
their heads up in the clouds, and Extraverts are more likely 
to have their feet down on the ground. 


Sensing (S) Types and Intuitive (N) Types Sensing types 
and Intuitive types are positioned on the type table in the 
same order as in the name of the S-N dichotomy, namely 
with Sensing on the left and Intuition on the right. 


Thinking (T) Types and Feeling (F) Types The Thinking 
types compose the two outer columns of the table. Feeling 
types are contained in the two inner columns. Myers chose 
this placement so that it would be easy to remember by 
considering that the Feeling types, with their greater need 
for affiliation, are in the middle columns, surrounded by 
other types. The more objective Thinking types are in the 
outer columns, with unpeopled space beside them. 


Judging (J) Types and Perceiving (P) Types Note that the 
decisive Judging types are found in the top and bottom 
rows, giving boundaries for the flexibility and adaptability 
of the Pereeiving types, who are in the two middle rows. 


Summary 


Type tables and type groupings present data on the con- 
struct validity of the MBTI—that is, evidence that the 
MBTI accurately reflects Jung's theory and the construets 
it includes. Type tables also provide information and 
insight into the characteristies of the types. One goal of 
becoming familiar with the type table format is to be able 
to recognize a samples characteristics at a glance and thus 
obtain a great deal of information quickly. As an aid for 
achieving this goal, Table 4.1, arrayed as a standard type 
tahle, shows the contribution that each preference makes 
to each of the 16 types, regardless of the unique dynamics 
of each type. 


Identifying Groupings 
of the Preferences 


When practitioners use the same terms to mean different 
things, confusion and misunderstanding inevitably occur. It 
is therefore important to clarify the terminology used to 
refer to particular combinations of type preferences in order 
to achieve consistency in the use of language among MBTI] 
users. This section covers terminology for combinations of 
Extraversion and Introversion with each of the four fune- 
tions (E and I with S, N, T, and F), groupings of the four 
attitudes (E and I with J and P), and combinations of the 
four mental functious (S and N with T and F). 


Understanding the 16 Types 37 


In the past, terms such as Extraverted Intuitive types, or 
EN types, were sometimes used to refer to all types whose 
four letters included Extraversion and Intuition (ENF], 
ENTJ, ENFP, and ENTP) or to refer to the two types for 
whom extraverted Intuition is the dominant function 
(ENTP, ENFP). The first usage does not take type dynamies 
into account, while the second meaning of the combination 
refers to the dynamic character of types. The current empha- 
sis on studying whole types and type dynamics makes elar- 
ity in such terminology critical. The terminological conven- 
tions described below are used throughout this manual and 
are included in the Glossary. 


Combining Extraversion or 
Introversion with the Four Functions 





Only two types share the same dominant function and atti- 
tude. For example, ISFP and INFP are referred to as the domi- 
nant introverted Feeling types. However, four types share a pref- 
erence for the same attitude and function. For example, ISFP. 
ISFJ, INFP and INF] share a preference for Introversion and 
Feeling; we refer to these four types as having a preference 
for Introversion with Feeling. 





Confusion can oceur when the attitude of Extraversion or 
Introversion is combined with one of the four functions, 
Sensing, Intuition, Thinking, or Feeling. Terms such as dom- 
inant introverted Sensing types and dominant extraverted 
Thinking types are used to identify the dynamic combina- 
tions. However, when the four types who prefer both Extra- 
version and Thinking are present—ESTJ, ENTJ, ESTP 
ENTP—the designation Extraversion with Thinking is cor- 
rect. The same convention is used with other combinations 
of E and I with the other functions. 


Combining the Four Attitudes 


Combining E and | with | and P gives us practical insights 
about type dynamics. 


Combinations of the two attitudes of energy (E and D) and 
the two attitudes toward the outer world (J and P) do more 
than reflect the presence of the two attitudes specified; they 
identify particular type dynamics. Extraverted judging types 
(the EJ types, EST], ENT], ESFJ, ENFJ) are those whose 
dominant function is an extraverted judging one (ET or EF). 
Introverted perceiving types (the IP types, ISTP, INTP, ISFP, 
INFP) are those whose dominant function is an introverted 
judging function (IT or IF). The dominant function of EP 
types (ESTP, ESEP ENTP, ENFP) is an extraverted perceiving 
(ES or EN) function, and the IJ types (ISTJ, ISFJ, INT], 
INFJ) have a dominant introverted perceiving function (IS or 
IN). When researehers and praetitioners foeus on these 
combinations, attention to their dynamie status ean provide 
practical insights. 


38 Theory 
Table 4.1 Contributions Made by Each Preference to Each Type 
Sensing Types 
With Thinking With Feeling With Feeling 
IST) ISF) INF) 
Ww 
3 | Depth of concentration Depth of concentration | | Depth of concentration 
= S Reliance on facts Reliance on facts N Grasp of possibilities 
= T Logic and analysis Warmth and sympathy | F Warmth and sympathy 
2 s J Organization Organization J Organization 
ps 
9 
&gt; 
o 
5 
&amp; 
$ ISTP ISFP INFP 
E: Depth of concentration Depth of concentration | | Depth of concentration 
= Reliance on facts Reliance on facts N Grasp of possibilities 
Logic and analysis Warmth and sympathy | F Warmth and sympathy 
E Adaptability Adaptability Adaptability 
$ ESTP ESFP ENFP 
a Breadth of interests Breadth of interests Breadth of interests 
t Reliance on facts Reliance on facts Grasp of possibilities 
E Logic and analysis Warmth and sympathy Warmth and sympathy 
ms Adaptability Adaptability Adaptability 
$ 
d 
5 
x 
uj 


ESTJ 


Breadth of interests 


ESF} 
Breadth of interests 


Reliance on facts Reliance on facts 


Intuitive Types 


ENF] 


E Breadth of interests 
N Grasp of possibilities 


With Thinking 


INT) 


| Depth of concentration 
N Grasp of possibilities 

T Logic and analysis 

) Organization 


INTP 


| Depth of concentration 
N Grasp of possibilities 

T Logic and analysis 

P Adaptability 


ENTP 
E Breadth of interests 
N Grasp of possibilities 
T Logic and analysis 
P Adaptability 


ENT) 


E Breadth of interests 
N Grasp of possibilities 


Warmth and sympathy 


Logic and analysis 


Judging Types 


Organization Organization 


E 


J Organization 





Warmth and sympathy | F Logic and analysis 


J Organization 





Combining the Two Kinds of Mental Functions 


Each pairing of mental functions identifies four types. For 


example, the SF types are ESF], ESFP, ISFJ, ISFP. 


Combining two mental functions does not imply type 
dynamics and therefore can have only one referential mean- 
ing. Sensing Thinking (ST) types, for example, are only the 
four types that prefer both Sensing and Thinking; Intuitive 
Feeling (NF) types are those four types who prefer both 
Intuition and Feeling. Other two-letter and three-letter 
eombinations may also be studied but do not present termi- 
nological difficulties. Table 4.2 shows the terminology used 
to specify the eight dominant funetions (note that these 
also define the eight types specified by Carl G. Jung) and the 


eight combinations that combine E or I with each of the 
[our functions. 

When presenting data on type tables it is common prae- 
tice to include information for two-letter combinations of 
preferences. See Table 7.14 in Chapter 7 as an illustration of 
such a type table. 


Characteristics of Groupings 
of the Preferences 


It is often useful to describe a set of types that have common 
charaeteristics. The main problem in grouping types is to 
restrict the description to the common characteristics found 


Understanding the 16 Types 39 





Table 4.2 Terminology for Describing Combinations of Preferences 


Dynamic Combinations 


ESE 


The two dominant extraverted Sensing types— 
Types ESTP and ESFP 
IS} The two dominant introverted Sensing types— 
Types IST] and ISFJ 
ENP The two dominant extraverted Intuitive types— 
Types ENTP and ENFP 
INJ The two dominant introverted Intuitive types— 
Types INT) and INF} 
ET] The two dominant extraverted Thinking types— 
Types EST] and ENT) 
ITE The two dominant introverted Thinking types— 
Types ISTP and INTP 
EF] The two dominant extraverted Feeling types— 
Types ESF] and ENF] 
IFP The two dominant introverted Feeling types— 
Types ISFP and INFP 


E-I with the Functions 


ES Extraverts with Sensing 

Types The four types—ESTP ESFP, EST], ESF] 

IS Introverts with Sensing 

Types The four types—ISTP ISFP. IST], ISF] 

EN Extraverts with Intuition 

Types | The four types—ENTP, ENFP, ENF], ENT] 
IN Introverts with Intuition 

Types The four types—INT], INF], INTP INFP 
ET Extraverts with Thinking 

Types The four types—EST], ESTP ENT], ENTP 
IT Introverts with Thinking 

Types The four types—ISTP IST], INTP INT] 

EF Extraverts with Feeling 

Types The four types—ESFP ESF], ENFP ENF} 
IF Introverts with Feeling 

Types The four types—ISF], INF], SFP, INFP 





in every type in the group. Characteristics found in only one 
or two types in a group of four should not be reported as 
typical of the whole group. This section provides brief 
descriptions of the characteristics of each group based upon 
our expectations from type theory and consistent findings 
of experienced observers. It is important to bear in mind 
that these descriptions apply to mature, well-developed 
members of each grouping and may not apply to all people 
who self-report that type. 

Following each description is a table summarizing 
selected research results relevant to that group of types. The 
research summaries are divided into four general content 
areas. Research relevant 10 personality variables, psychother- 
apy, health, stress, and coping are shown first because type 
theory was developed by Jung to address his observations of 
normal personality differences within the context of his psy- 
chotherapeutic practice. Education research appears next, 
followed by research on type and career variables. Education 
was an early and continuing focus of Isabel Myers in her own 
research, as were the implications of type for career choice 
and career satisfaction. The last content area is organizations, 
leadership, management, and teams. This is the most recent 
area to receive research attention. 

Readers may note that although a good deal of research 
has focused on specific type groupings, detailed informa- 
tion for some groupings is much more extensive than for 
others. The fact that there is little research evidence describ- 
ing particular groupings may be due to little interest in the 
grouping by researchers or the scope and focus of the 


research, rather than the actual absence of notable charac- 
teristics for that grouping. For groupings where there is 
very little research to report, a brief narrative describing the 
available research is provided instead of a table. 


There is little information available for some type groupings 


and combinations of preferences, perhaps due to lack of 
interest on the part of researchers. 





The summaries of research contained in all of the tables 
in this chapter are constrained by the following factors: 


m They are dependent on what researchers have chosen to 
study and what they decided to report in their research 
articles and therefore may not represent all possible 
potentially useful information. 

gm The research reported is limited to compilations of MBTI 
research results, rather than individual journal articles. 
For example, previous research as well as the most 
recent research that emerged from the national sample 
studies are included in the application chapters of Part V 
of this manual. Those chapters therefore serve as a 
research source. The same is true of the chapters in MBTI 
Applications (Hammer, 1996b), another source for the 
research results in this chapter. 

w Only statistically significant results and clearly distin- 
guishing rankings on variables are listed. However, sam- 
ple sizes and research methods vary considerably. Caution 
in interpretation and generalization of results is there- 
fore appropriate. 


40 . Theory 


m The results included are limited to those that could be 
briefly summarized and easily understood without 
detailed explanations. Studies that look at more complex 
type issues are therefore not included. 


Source notes follow each table. Readers who wish detailed 
information about a particular research result should consult 
the sources cited. Following each table and its source notes 
is a brief commentary that highlights interesting findings 
and contrasts some of the results for that combination or 
type with results found for other relevant preference combi- 
nations and types. These comments attempt to place the 
rescarch within a broader context of societal expectations 
and biases. Because the comments do not summarize the 
research results, it is best to review each table before reading 
the comments. 


Additional Cautions in 
Interpreting Research Results 


Interesting observations emerge when we look at research 
for particular type groupings and whole types in the four 
content areas described above. Most notable is the fact that 
people with some combinations of two preferences, as well 
as some whole types that are presented later in the chapter, 
seem to be associated with "positive" characteristics in one 
or more content areas while other combinations and types 
are characterized in a more "negative" way. This is particu- 
larly evident in results in the first content area— personality, 
psychotherapy, health, stress, coping—and the second 
area—education. These kinds of effects highlight the pres- 
ence of the type bias that results when a single norm is 
applied to everyone within our society. In such a single- 
norm approach, some types inevitably are viewed as more 
competent, emotionally adapted, or successful than are 
other types whose qualities are not in accord with the cul- 
tural notion of the "desirable" individual. For example, test 
items designed to assess qualities such as self-confidence, 
optimism, comfort in the outer world, stress tolerance, and 
good coping skills are likely to overlap in content with 
characteristics that legitimately reflect a preference for 
Extraversion or Introversion. This overlap in item content, 
along with the effects of living in a society that favors an 
Extraverted over an Introverted use of energy, contributes 
to some of the negative- and positive-seeming research 
results reported in some tables. Chapter 10 discusses some 
of these issues in more detail. 

Bias is also evident in the area of education, where there 
seems to be a prevailing assumption that everyone learns in 
the same ways and therefore should respond well to the 
same teaching methods. From a typological perspective 
there are distinct differences in the ways different types 
learn. This is apparent in how the types perform on stan- 
dard educational achievement measures and in such behav- 
ioral measures as school dropout rates. Chapter 11 presents 
the details of such sources of type bias. 





Another factor should inhibit overgeneralizing and mak- 
ing inferences about the brief research results shown in the 
tables. Whereas the descriptions of the typical characteristics 
of members of the type groupings and whole types reflect 
mature, well-developed people, research studies very likely 
include a quite broad spectrum of those same types. We can- 
not tell from the data shown to what extent this factor may 
contribute to both the more negative characterizations found 
in some tables and the more positive outcomes observed. 

The discussion of each type grouping begins with the 
distinctive dynamic feature that the types in each group 
share. The descriptive phrases shown for each grouping 
were created by Isabel Myers to identify and help people 
remember its central distinctive feature. 


The Columns of the Type Table: The Four 
Mental Functions (ST, SE, NE NT) 


Isabel Myers considered the columns of the type table to be 
the most important of the groupings of the types, particularly 
where career choices are concerned. These groups focus 
on the combinations of perception (S and N) with judgment 
(T and F). The type characteristics are assumed to stem from 
the preferred use of these mental functions. The pairings of 
functions have received a great deal of research attention 
over the years. Function pairings are often viewed as learn- 
ing styles or cognitive styles. This is an area of interest to 
educators, career counselors, and organization specialists. 

Two column types, NF and NT, are also used to designate 
two of the four temperaments described by Keirsey and Bates 
and discussed later in this chapter (Keirsey &amp; Bates, 1978). 
The focus in describing NF and NT as temperaments is dif- 
ferent from the present focus. However, for ease of contrast, 
the research results that describe NF and NT types in this 
section are repeated in the section on temperaments. 

Table 4.3 compares the column types based on a knowl- 
edge of their components. Specific descriptive and research 
information about each of the four column types follows. 


STs: The Practical and Matter-of-Fact Types 





For the four Sensing Thinking (ST) types, one of the two 
functions, Sensing or Thinking, is the dominant function, 
and the other is the auxiliary function. 

ST people rely primarily on Sensing for purposes of per- 
ception and on Thinking for purposes of judgment. Their 
main interests focus on facts because facts can be collected 


Understanding the 16 Types 41 





Table 4.3 The Combinations of Perception and Judgment 


ST 


People who prefer Sensing and Thinking 


Focus attention on Facts Facts 
And handle these with 
They tend to become 


Nonpersonal analysis 


Practical and 


matter-of-fact friendly 


Technical areas with 
facts and objects 


And find scope for 
their abilities in 


Sensing and Feeling 
Personal warmth 
Sympathetic and 


Practical help and 
services for people 


NF NT 
Intuition and Feeling Intuition and Thinking 





Possibilities Possibilities 


Personal warmth Nonpersonal analysis 


Enthusiastic and 
insightful 


Logical and 
ingenious 


Understanding and Theoretical and 
communication with people technical developments 





and verified direcily by the senses—by seeing, hearing, 
touching, counting, weighing, and measuring. The ST types 
typically approach their decisions regarding facts using 
objective analysis because what they trust is Thinking, with 
its linear and logical process of reasoning from cause to 
effect, from premise to conclusion. In consequence STs tend 
to be practical and matter-of-fact. Type theory predicts that 
STs will be attracted to fields that demand nonpersonal 
analysis of concrete facts, such as economics, law, surgery, 
business, accounting, production, and the handling of 
machines and materials. The frequency with which ST 
types are found in such fields bears this out. Table 4.4 sum- 
marizes relevant research results for ST types. 

Most of the results in Table +.4 seem in accord with an ST 
approach to the content areas shown. For example, seeking 
personal counseling is not a “natural” way of solving prob- 
lems for types who focus on logically assessing the facts of 
their situation. STs’ academic performance, educational and 
career preferences, and characteristics as leaders, managers, 
and team members are also consistent with the qualities that 
would be expected for people who focus on Sensing and 
Thinking as the preferred ways of perceiving and coming to 
conclusions. Possible support for the reported disadvantage 
that Sensing types face from typical academic testing proce- 
dures is shown in the overrepresentation of ST types in the 
Academic Decathlon (a “performance-based” indicator of 
competence) relative to their frequency as National Merit 
Finalists (a “test score-based" indicator). 


SFs: The Sympathetic and Friendly Types 


ef B 





For Sensing Feeling (SF) types, one of the two functions, 
Sensing or Feeling, is the dominant function, and the other 
is the auxiliary function. 


SF people, like ST people, rely primarily on Sensing for 
purposes of perception, but they prefer Feeling for purposes 
of judgment. They too are mainly interested in facts they 
can gather directly through the senses, but they approach 
their decisions with a subjectivity that is based on their per- 
sonal value system. This subjectivity and the warmth they 
convey comes from their trust of Feeling, with its power to 
weigh how much things matter to themselves and others. 
In contrast to Sensing Thinking types, they are more inter- 
ested in facts about people than in facts about things. 

SFs tend to be sympathetic and friendly. In theory, we 
would expect them to be attracted to fields where their per- 
sonal warmth can be effectively applied to concrete situa- 
tions. The combination of Sensing and Feeling can be valu- 
able in selling tangibles, service-with-a-smile jobs, teaching 
(especially in the early grades and applied fields), nursing, 
pediatrics, and other health helds involving direct patient 
care. The sympathetic and friendly SFs are frequent at all 
levels of direct patient care. Table +.5 summarizes relevant 
research results for SF types. 

There is a growing body of research that shows overrep- 
resentation of some Sensing types among people with 
hypertension and/or heart disease. These findings are pre- 
sented and discussed in Chapter 10. The specific and 
intriguing finding in Table 4.5 with regard to SF males can 
yield many hypotheses that require empirical evidence to 
support or negate them as possible explanations for the 
research result. For example, one could conjecture that the 
qualities of conscientiousness and loyalty that may con- 
tribute to SF ovcrrepresentation among hypertensives are 
similar to those that contribute to SF underreprescntation in 
referrals to substance abuse programs. For this and similar 
findings, however, we must consider the amount and kind 
of contribution type may make to the diagnosis of hyper- 
tension, as well as recognizing that the majority of SF males 
do not suffer from hypertension. 

As was found for the ST group, the education results 
support often-noted bias toward Intuition in our educa- 
tional assessment procedures, and both teacher beliefs and 
approaches in organizational settings highlight differences 
between the ST qualities shown in Table 4.4 and the SF ori- 
entation reflected in this table. 


42 Theory 


Table 4.4 Research Describing ST Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


— — ———— eee a enn ——— ÓÁPRE VR 


Underrepresented among students seeking counseling! 








MM c-r — - Mu Kis Tu ^e dpt e P 5 


As teachers, endorsed an external system of belief about discipline for children (children develop as a 


Performed worse than INF types on a series of academic aptitude tests among middle school students? 


2 


Overrepresented among Academic Decathlon participants compared with their proportion among 


Overrepresented among female school administrators in the People's Republic of China? 


Overrepresented among Hawaiian foreign language students at the University of Hawaii 


3 





Ranked lowest among chemical engineering students in passing curriculum? 


MARRE mX-GURGE ICE NCTUNOACO— Wu apMmRmMEm 1w.— aM moo uper Cata psal e 72e a Cali 0 auta ed 


19 44 


Education 
result of external conditions)? 
Outperformed both NF and NT dental hygiene students? 
Second highest in number of reported books read per year 
National Merit Finalists? 

Careers 


environment characteristics; higher than INFs and NTs in "Clarity" and "Managerial control 


————— SR A e ie t MM MA eM 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


Lowest of four in “Co-worker cohesion,’ "Supervisor support,’ and "Task orientation" as ideal work 


"4 


m — E IM CM. 227 oe ee oe ^ Dn Dae 





As managers evaluating alternatives, may be predisposed to impose "erroneous regularity and 
structure"on random events; become more decisive in well-defined and regulated environments? 


Are task oriented as change agents? 


Recommend behavior modification of people rather than changing tasks when policies fail? 


Were the only grouping to use behavior modification to promote change? 


Looked at the fewest reports and were the most satisfied information users among MBA students in a 


study of information use 


Had strongest preference for tabular reports as a source of information 


6 


Showed most risk avoidance; more inclined to take risks when in an environment consistent with 


their type® 


Maintained high interest throughout a production simulation that required learning well-defined, 


structured procedures? 


More accepting of closed climates in a study of type and organizational climate 


6 


Ranked second of four in lowering costs in a computer simulation where goal was to achieve the 


lowest cost of production? 





Source: lOuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ^DiTliberio, 1996; ^Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996, +See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; Haley, 1997; *Walck, 1996. 


NFs: The Enthusiastic and Insightful Types 





For Intuitive Feeling (NF) types, one of the two functions, 
Intuition or Feeling, is the dominant function, and the 
other is the auxiliary lunction. 

People who prefer Intuition for perceiving and Feeling 
as the way to come to conclusions typically possess the 
same personal warmth as SF people. However, since they 
prefer Intuition to Sensing, they focus their interest upon 


possibilities rather than concrete situations. They are likely 
to be attracted to new projects, things that have never hap- 
pened but might be made to happen, or truths that have not 
yet come to light. NF types are typically interested in the 
complexities of communication, and their Intuition pro- 
vides them with an interest in patterns that underlie imme- 
diate facts, symbolic meanings, and theoretical relation- 
ships. Feeling provides the interest in using these intuitive 
insights in human relationships. 

The personal warinth and commitment with which NF 
people seek and follow up possibilities tend to make them 
enthusiastic as well as insightful. They often have a marked 
gift for the spoken or written word and can communicate 
both the possibilities they see and the values they attach to 
those possibilities. They are likely to be attracted to work 
that involves the unfolding of possibilities, especially possi- 
bilities for people, such as in teaching (particularly in the 
upper grades and college), selling intangibles, counseling, 


Table 4.5 Research Describing SF Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Rr Mp e Pee the ete PASE EERIE 


———  eriottans —S = 


Education 


Understanding the 16 Types 43 


Males overrepresented among hypertensive patients! 
Underrepresented among new students referred to a substance abuse workshop? 


As teachers, endorsed interaction of inner and outer forces to account for the development of 


children, in a study of teachers’ beliefs about discipline? 


Lowest of four in number of reported books read per year? 


Ranked third of four among chemical engineering students ranked highest to lowest in order 


of passing? 


eA Tan ELIE DR IG aa a € 


Careers 


entem m re emt —— ee ee Lm Den ntum 


Among dietitians, more satisfied with occupational specialty? 


Reported higher intent to leave than NTs in study of "intent to leave current job”? 


RTT ny Di Naw i ri Sat OA So - 2 &gt; — - - - e 


Organizations, Leadership, 


Management,Teams its 


information 


m mm TT — rg mt 2 


Often suggest consultative, group process solutions and put more importance on people-oriented 


Used transactional analysis almost exclusively compared with other groupings? 


Showed most risk tolerance and were more likely to take risk when operating in an environment 


incompatible with their type? 


Ranked first in lowering cost in a computer simulation where goal was to achieve lowest cost 


of production? 


EEN 77034 8077 TOYS ENEGT NCIIDÓN C UNCLE T Game Eae a a ee UAE OI EO 3 
Source: lshelton, 1996; ^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; 3DiTibeno, 1996, ^walck, 1996; ?Hammer, 1996a; Haley, 1997, 


writing, and research. Table 4.6 summarizes research rele- 
vant to NF types. 

The results listed in Table 4.6 illuminate the quite dif- 
ferent approaches of NF types as compared with ST types 
in all four areas, as well as highlight the influence of Intu- 
ition compared with Sensing in these types. Much evi- 
dence has been reported showing that the characteristics 
that emerge from an underlying preference for Intuition 
combined with a Feeling preference lead to an interest in 
both providing and receiving psychological services, par- 
ticularly those that support a person-centered approach. 
The results in education on academic performance and 
teaching and learning styles reflect the effects of an Intu- 
itive approach to this area, and the influence of NF is quite 
apparent in the values and behaviors shown in the career 
and organizational variables that characterize NF research 
results. It is interesting to note that NF types were disinter- 
ested or did not perform well in areas that called on their 
less-preferred functions, such as in the production simula- 
tion studies. 


NTs: The Logical and Ingenious Types 





For Intuitive Thinking (NT) types, one of the two functions, 
Intuition or Thinking, is the dominant function, and the 
other is the auxiliary function. 

Like NF people, NT people prefer Intuition for purposes 
of perception, but they prefer the objectivity of Thinking for 
purposes of judgment. They too focus on possibilities, the- 
oretical relationships, and abstract patterns, but they judge 
these from a nonpersonal, cause-and-effect perspective. 
They often pursue possibilities that are technical, scientific, 
theoretical, or executive, where attention to the human 
issues may be secondary. 

NTs tend to be logical and ingenious. They are best in solv- 
ing problems within their fteld of special interest, whether 
scientific rescarch, mathematics, the more intricate aspects of 
finance, or any sort of pioneering or innovative endeavor in a 
wide variety of technical or administrative areas. Table 4.7 
summarizes relevant research results for NT types. 

In this table we can see both the differential influence of 
T rather than F on some of the research results and some 
similarities and differences in comparison to the SF table of 
results. Although some of the over- and underrepresenta- 
tions shown for NT types make “typological sense,” other 
observations require further study and replication to 
achieve understanding—for example, the underrepresenta- 
tion among hypertensives and overrepresentation reported 
for Type A behavior. Knowledge of the specific samples and 
methods that generated these results would help, and read- 
ers who are particularly interested in this area may wish to 
review the original studies involved. 

The results shown for education, careers, and organiza- 
tional variables reinforce what was observed for the effects 


4 Theory 


Table 4.6 Research Describing NF Types 
Personality, Psychotherapy, 


Predominate among providers of psychological services 


Overrepresented among client-centered psychologists! 


Underrepresented among behavioral psychologists! 


Overrepresented among students seeking counseling! 


Underrepresented among both male and female chronic pain patients? 


Females tended to be married much longer in comparison with female NTs! 


Underrepresented among men who had undergone coronary bypass surgery? 


ENF physicians had “dealing with patients’ emotional difficulties" and "advising/counseling patients" 


E ———— MÀ QUIS 





—* 


As teachers, endorsed an internal system of belief about discipline for children (children develop from 


As middle school students, performed better than ST types on a series of academic aptitude tests* 


Reported reading more books than any other combination 


4 


Among Japanese students, were overrepresented among foreign language students at the University 


Ranked second out of four in passing among chemical engineering students? 


Health, Stress, Coping 
as typical practice activities? 
Education 
an unfolding of potential)? 
of Hawaii? 
Careers 





1————AEA—————— ——————Ó — 


Reported less job satisfaction with occupational specialty than other types? 


Had higher perceptions of the expected utility of possible alternate jobs than SFs in a study of "intent 


to leave current job”? 


Higher than STs and SFs on "Innovation" as ideal work environment characteristic 


r — = 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


Had weakest preference for tabular reports in a study of information use 


Believe information on people more important than other information 


Least satisfied information users 


— " peus p ~ (T HM. 00 eet 


7 


7 


More likely to use group- and people-oriented techniques to promote change’ 


Rely on anecdotes, catchy symbols, vivid imagery to make points” 


Use personal evaluations of situations to reduce uncertainty? 


May ignore statistical evidence and overestimate their ability to work through plans or implement them? 


Took an intermediate position of nominal risk taking; were more likely to take risk when operating in an 
environment incompatible with their type, in a study of risk tolerance? 


Lost interest rapidly and "dropped out" in a production simulation that required learning well-defined, 


structured procedures" 


Ranked third of four in simulated attempt to achieve lowest production costs 


7 


c A n 272 A - - ^ ^ ~ ? - D — : n 7 ? 
Source. lOuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ^Shelton, 1996, JHammer, 19962; Ds Itherio, 1996; Kirby &amp; Barger (1996); See C hapter 12. "Uses of Type in Career Counseling"; ^ Walck, 


1996. Haley, 1997. 


of Intuition compared with Sensing, as well as highlight the 
NT as compared with NF typological influence—for exam- 
ple, the NT focus on structure and the NF focus on people 
in management situations. 


The Rows of the Type Table: 
The Four Attitudes (IJ, IP, EP, EJ) 


The rows of the type table group the Introverted and 
Extraverted perceiving types, IJs, whose dominant function is 
an introverted perceiving function, and EPs, whose dominant 
function is an extraverted perceiving function, and the Intro- 
verted and Extraverted judging types, IPs, whose dominant 


function is an introverted judging function, and EJs, whose 
dominant function is an extraverted judging function. 


Ijs: The Decisive Introverts 


i) foo 





Table 4.7 Research Describing NT Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 


Health, Stress, Coping for affective approaches! 


Understanding the 16 Types p 





Overrepresented among students preferring cognitive approaches to psychotherapy; underrepresented 


Females tended have much shorter marriages than female NFs! 


Underrepresented among male substance abusers 


Males underrepresented among hypertensive patients 


| 
2 


Overrepresented among those having Type A behavior? 


Underrepresented among both male and female chronic pain patients 


oo A JPEPEUNEPUPQIIIPVERUURUPREU I I UU IIRURTHTETI TESI — — -— . — 


Education 
beliefs about discipline? 


2 


Endorsed an internal system (children develop from an unfolding of potential) in a study of teachers’ 


As writing instructors, gave higher grades to students of the same type? 


Obtained higher geometry achievement scores among rural high school students? 


Reported reading third highest number of books per year? 


Overrepresented among top 100 executive educators 
Ranked highest among chemical engineering students in passing curriculum? 


——'Ó' 


SI p pa D n RD ai ETON DON = x E — =~ € EE 


Careers 


ito ap to taa tni ——— M xx 


————————————— HQ A a 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


3 


Less satisfied with career among secondary marketing education teachers? 


Overrepresented among secretaries stating they disliked their work? 


——————— —- 


As managers, see patterns in structured data, ignore cases that negate their beliefs, may resort to quick, 
superficial studies; may persevere in beliefs despite contradictory evidence? 


Tend to use survey feedback to promote organizational change? 


Sought more quantitative data than NFs in solving an unstructured case study problem 


Found information about organizational structure important in study of information content 


6 


Took an intermediate position of nominal risk taking; more likely to take risk when operating in an 


environment incompatible with their type, in a study of risk tolerance 


6 


Lost interest rapidly and “dropped out” in a production simulation that required learning well-defined, 


structured procedures 


Most strongly favored open climates and rejected closed climates, in a study of type and organizational 


climate 


Ranked last in lowering costs in a computer simulation where goal was to achieve the lowest cost of 


production® 


Source: lOuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; 2Shelton. 1996; 3D Tibeno. 1996: +Hammer. 1996a; &gt; laley, 1997; Owalck, 1996. 


All four Introverted Judging (1]) types have a dominant 
introverted perceiving function and an auxiliary extraverted 
judging function. 

[Js are introspective, persevering, and hard to convince 
or change, unless compelling data are provided that over- 
ride a decision or foregone conclusion. IJs can appear resis- 
tant to change because they extravert their preferred auxil- 
iary judging funetion, Thinking or Feeling. This means 
they state their conclusions rather than providing the data 
for their conclusions (their introverted, dominant perceiv- 
ing function). They can therefore appear to others to be 
adamant and inflexible. However, since their pereeiving 
function is the dominant, most crucial one, they will relin- 
quish a conclusion if provided with new information that 
contradicts the conclusion, even when it scems to other 
people that the IJs decision is firm and intractable. Table 
3.8 summarizes relevant research results lor YJ types. 


One might cautiously infer that the results showing that 
female lJ types report longer and fewer marriages is a reflec- 
tion of a likely IJ emphasis on persistence, stability, and 
permanence in many aspects of life. Readers particularly 
interested in this area are referred to the relationship studies 
discussed in Chapter 10. 

Particular caution is needed in interpreting the "sub- 
stance abuse” results in this and other Chapter 4 tables. The 
majority of data in this area were gathered within substance 
abuse treatment programs—people who were referred to 
and/or voluntarily entered treatment. Over- and underrep- 
resentations are best interpreted with this in mind. Actual 
base rates by type for substance abuse are not available. 
Therefore, typological results may best reflect the greater or 
lesser attraction of the types or members of particular type 
groupings to treatment programs, rather than greater or 
lesser incidence of substance abuse. 


46 Theory 


Table 4.8 Research Describing IJ Types 
Personality, Psychotherapy, 


Underrepresented among new college students required to attend substance abuse workshop 


Females married longer than any other female combination 


Female ITJs married fewest number of times compared with all other female groupings! 





2 


3 


As medical students, scored second lowest of the four on the 16 PF Leadership Scale? 








acc MP E M Lad vt^. ccm mea 5-0 


Health, Stress, Coping 
More likely to be substance abusers, among the four combinations 
Overrepresented among male substance abusers! 
Overrepresented among females in a substance abuse program 
Education Scored higher among college students on an algebra final examination 
Males more likely to persist in engineering school? 
Overrepresented among Japanese students of language at the University of Hawaii 
Careers 


environment characteristics? 


——— E ~ ee re LR et D D DAS E 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


Least likely to take risk in a study of risk tolerance among top executives 


Higher than IPs on “Managerial control" and lower than EPs on “Physical comfort" as ideal work 





Dislike transition periods in the work setting; tend to withdraw during transitions to process and 
examine new information; accept and support change only when it fits with their inner understanding? 


7 


; j^. — E -ND- ve. - 
Source, Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996, “DiTibeno, 1996; 3Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996; *Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; &gt;See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling ; Barger &amp; kirby. 


1995, ' Walck, 1996 


It is also interesting that lJ types are underrepresented 
among college students who were showing the kinds of 
behaviors assumed to reflect actual or potential substance 
abusc. This same discrepancy between college behaviors 
and later appearance in substance abuse treatment pro- 
grams occurs for other type groupings and types, as will be 
scen in later Chapter 4 tables. 

Research results in the areas of cducation, careers, and 
organizational variables all seem in accord with expectations 
considering the qualities associated with the IJ combination. 


IPs: The Adaptable Introverts 





All four Introverted Perceiving (IP) types have a dominant 
introverted judging function and an auxiliary extraverted 
perceiving lunction. 

[Ps arc introspective, adaptable in little things, and firm on 
important issues because their dominant judging function is 
central to their personality. Others may assume that the outer 
flexibility and adaptability of IPs reflects their internal state 
as well. Such an assumption is usually unjustified, especially 


when important inner judgments are at issue. In such cir- 
cumstances, the flexibility of the IPs’ extraverted auxiliary 
percciving function can be overridden by their dominant 
judging function, Thinking or Feeling. When this occurs, 
IPs can appear intractable and resistant to change. For new 
information to be effective in promoting a willingness to 
change, it must address the logic or values of their dominant 
judging function or it will be rejected as irrelevant. Table 4.9 
summarizes relevant research results for IP types. 

At first glance, we might assume that the four IP types— 
ISTP. ISFP, INTP and INFP—may be vulnerable to some per- 
sonal and relationship difficulties, as well as carcer indecision 
and dissatisfaction, while valuing work autonomy and adapt- 
ing well to change in the work setting. However, an under- 
standing of type provides a context within which to realisti- 
cally assess the probable meaning of some of the results 
shown. The previously mentioned limitations of substance 
abuse data need to be considered here. That ITP females 
report more marriages may be related to their observed ten- 
dency to be less satisfied with relationships in general, as dis- 
cussed in Chapter 10, where it is suggested that different 
definitions of satisfaction may be operating for different types. 

The education, career, and organizational variables that 
seem to distinguish IP types are quite consistent with a 
highly flexible approach to life. IP types may not be particu- 
larly motivated to seck the closure of a career decision, nor 
by standard notions of “leadership” and “control” of their 
environment. Career decisiveness and leadership are highly 
valued in our culture, and therefore IP types tend to stand 
out as marching to a different drummer. If carefully done 


Table 4.9 Research Describing IP Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 





RSE HUELLA Roo — — — 


Education 


Understanding the 16 Types — 47 


— — r m PE 





Female ITPs married most number of times compared with all other female groupings! 
Except for ISFPs, more likely to be substance abusers among four combinations! 


Overrepresented among male substance abusers! 


As medical students, scored lowest of the four on the 16 PF Leadership Scale? 


Among medical students, said they decided late and, even though in medical school, were not confident 


about their decision? 


— e poe me E —— - -— 


Careers 


Particularly likely to say they did not like their work, in a general study of job satisfaction 


3 


Higher than EJs on “Autonomy” as ideal work environment characteristic; lower than Ejs and Ijs on 


“Managerial control" * 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


One of two groups least positive about using statistical methods as an information source 


During transitions tend to be flexible and adaptable in small things and respond positively unless change 
violates inner values and principles—their dominant judging function? 


6 


a SER EI aE PETE TED TY TOS ES ee 
Source: tQuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996, ?Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, ?Hammer, 19964, "See Chapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling": Barger &amp; Kirby, 1995, Walck, 1996. 


substance abuse studies confirm an overrepresentation of 
these types, perhaps a contributing factor might be the 
stresses related to living in a manner that is not in accord 
with prevailing values. 


EPs: The Adaptable Extraverts 





All four Extraverted Perceiving (EP) types have a dominant 
perceiving function (S or N) that is extraverted and a 
judging function (T or F) that is the introverted auxiliary 
function. 

EPs are active, energetic, and sociable and often seek 
new experiences. They adapt even more easily to new outer 
conditions than do the IPs, for whom the extraverted per- 
ceiving function has only an auxiliary status. Their domi- 
nant extraverted perceiving function leads them to trust and 
eagerly engage the outer world. They are optimistic about 
what that outer world has to offer and about their ability to 
interact with it in a satisfying way. Their optimism may be 
perceived as excessive risk taking to types who approach 
the world more cautiously (often the types who introvert 
their perceiving function—for example, dominant intro- 
verted Sensing (ISJ) and dominant introverted Intuitive 
(INJ) types). EPs embrace new opportunities with opti- 
mism, and obstacles are seen as merely temporary setbacks 


or challenges to be met. At times, the pull to new experi- 
ences or possibilities in the world can override their auxil- 
iary introverted judgment, and they may in fact fail to 
achieve their optimistic intent. Table 4.10 summarizes rele- 
vant research results for EP types. 

It makes quite a difference when the dominant function 
of a type grouping is an extraverted perceiving function 
rather than an introverted judging one—at least in the 
kinds of variables reflected in Table 4.10 for EP types, as 
compared with Table 4.9 for IP types. Remember that both 
IP and EP types extravert their perceiving function and 
introvert their judging function, but for IP the extraverted 
function is the auxiliary one, and for EP it is the dominant 
function. The EP types appear less frequently in substance 
abuse groups than the IP types, in spite of the fact that col- 
lege officials assess them as showing behaviors that reflect 
or are predictive of substance abuse problems. 

In this table, EP types seem to demonstrate the same 
kind of flexibility and adaptability as the IP types, but their 
dominant extraverted perceiving function may contribute 
to their greater tendency to engage in societally valued lead- 
ership behavior. 


EJs: The Decisive Extraverts 





48 = Theory 


————— 





Table 4.10 Research Describing EP Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Underrepresented among male substance abusers 


Underrepresented among females in a substance abuse program 


Overrepresented among new college students required to attend substance abuse workshop! 


Underrepresented among men who had undergone coronary bypass surgery? 


nc ——-——— ———————— ree —— 


Education 


t sec Fa re ii T — 


Careers 
"Managerial control "4 


mdi ——— PNE 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


One of two groups least positive about using statistical methods as an information source 


megas ied ————————————— ie tt eese etm = srt tt tc 


———— 


As medical students, scored second highest of the four on the 16 PF Leadership Scale? 


———— a te pt att —P————— _ "-————————————— — —9 — 


Higher than Ijs on “Physical comfort" as ideal work environment characteristic; lower than EJs on 


OOE EE p EEERAEELA. quOMSsUN IDA REEL ACE — —————————— - —— 


Enthusiastically support transitions at work and respond resourcefully to new demands and challenges; 
may move too quickly for others' comfort; will resist change if not involved in decision-making process? 


6 


a LECLIIDUS TENEIICOIUEUIN NCCRCEEDENCC DIG RE AE UOIOUU CONG UNS OMA CMM GM RR GN RN NN 
Source: IQuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; "Shelton, 1996, Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; +See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; Barger &amp; Kirby, 1995; OWalck, 1996. 


All four Extraverted Judging types have a dominant ex- 
traverted judging function (T or F) and an auxiliary in- 
troverted perceiving function (S or N). 

EJs are fast moving, decisive, and confident looking, and 
they enjoy making things happen. It can be difficult for 
them to let go of a decision or conclusion because their 
dominant judging function (Thinking or Feeling) tends to 
be more persuasive than their auxiliary perceiving function 
(Sensing or Intuition). They are therefore harder to con- 
vince than the IJs, for whom judgment is auxiliary and has 
less authority in the personality. For EJs, new data are less 
compelling than the consequences (Thinking or Feeling) of 
persisting in a possibly faulty decision. They are therefore 
more likely to change their minds if a likely negative effect 
of a course of action is pointed out. EJs are seen hy others as 
natural leaders, and they relish that role, as it permits them 
to exercise their dominant judging function to reach deci- 
sions and get things done. Table 4.11 summarizes the 
research results for EJ types. 

A number of the research results in Table 4.11 are oppo- 
site to or quite dilferent from those in Table 4.9 for the 
opposite IP types, particularly in the substance abuse, edu- 
cational leadership, and career decisiveness areas. Note that 
most of the characteristics associated with EST], ENT], 
ESFJ, and ENFJ are consistent with qualities valued in our 
society. In these research results this can be seen especially 
in their apparent comfort with administration, managerial 
control, long-range planning, and apparent effectiveness 
during organizational change. 


Combinations of Perception and Orientations 
to the Outer World: SJ, SP NP, and NJ 


The SJ, SP, NP, and NJ grouping of types identifies types 
that use the same perceiving function in the same attitude 
of Extraversion or Introversion, regardless of whether their 
perceiving function is dominant or auxiliary in their type. 


A focus on this grouping allows us to understand the dif- 
ferent dynamics involved in introverting Sensing (character- 
istic of the SJ types) as compared with extraverting Sensing 
(characteristic of the SP types); and extraverting Intuition 
(characteristic of the NP types) as compared with introvert- 
ing Intuition (characteristic of the NJ types). A description 
of the distinctive character of these dynamic processes is 
included in each of the four sections that describe common 
dynamic elements. These descriptions are adapted from 
Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development (Myers &amp; 
Kirby, 1994). 

It should be noted that two of the combinations in- 
cluded here, SJ and SP, are also used to describe two of the 
four temperaments identified by Keirsey and Bates, along 
with the NF and NT combinations previously discussed. As 
was the case for S] and SP, the research evidence for these 
combinations that is shown in this section is repeated in the 
discussion of the tempcraments. 


SJs: The Realistic Decision Makers 





All four Sensing Judging (SJ) types introvert their Sensing 
function, regardless of whether it is dominant (IST], ISFJ) or 
auxiliary (ESTJ, ESF]), and extravert their preferred judging 
function, Thinking or Feeling. People find it difficult to 
describe what is involved when onc is introverting any one of 
the functions. This is particularly true when trying to 
describe the process of introverting Sensing, which involves 


Table 4.11 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 





Education 


2 —— 


Careers 


Understanding the 16 Types 








Research Describing EJ Types 


Males married longer than any other male type combination! 


Underrepresented among female substance abusers! 


Underrepresented among male substance abusers! 


Underrepresented among male hypertensive patients? 


rat ee ee — a -m ^ - - p ont - meee ee 


Overrepresented among top 100 executive educators? 


Overrepresented among freshman dental students? 
Overrepresented among female school administrators in the People's Republic of China? 
As medical students, scored highest of the four on the 16 PF Leadership Scale^ 


Among medical students, more often stated they decided on medicine early and were confident 
they were in the right field* 


ec oman eet ease — 


ESJs had highest career satisfaction among elementary and secondary school teachers? 
Facet-specific (facets of the job) results were "keeping busy and doing things for others"? 
Overrepresented among those rated high on retirement planning among university faculty and staff 


49 


planning to retire? 


Higher than IPs and EPs on "Managerial control" as ideal work environment characteristic; lower than 


IPs on “Autonomy”? 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 
structure prematurely’ 


In national sample, highest of all types in "Satisfaction with work” and “Satisfaction with company" 


Readily organize the external environment during change, make quick decisions, gather resources, 
create structures, move ahead; may have difficulty dealing with ambiguities; may strive to implement 


2" 3*4 : E A € 
Source: IQuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ^Shelton, 1996, DiTiberio, 1996; "Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, ?Hammer, 19963, See Chapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling": 


“Barger &amp; Kirby, 1995. 


directing one’s energy and attention inward in order to 
remember external reality and events, as well as internal 
thoughts, feelings, bodily sensations, and memories. The 
focus is on taking in new information and integrating it into 
an internal storehouse for retrieval when needed. When 
introverting Sensing, ones goal is to form a solid, substantial, 
and accurate understanding of ihe world and ones place in it. 

The effect of introverting Sensing can be seen in the 
ways that SJ types are typically described. They are seen as 
seeking order in their environment, as organized, depend- 
able, and conservative. They tend to solve problems by 
reliance on past experiences, and they dislike ambiguity. 
People are often unaware of the wealth of factual and expe- 
riential data SJs bring to bear in making decisions because 
their data tend to remain inside their heads. When they are 
called upon to give evidence and provide the detailed bases 
for their decisions, other types may feel overwhelmed by 
the information and see it as unnecessary minutiae. At 
times, SJs, especially those for whom introverted Sensing is 
dominant (ISTJ and ISFJ), can run the risk of being dis- 
tracted from their goals by their focus on collecting the facts 
that are relevant to the goal at haud. Tahle 4.12 summarizes 
relevant research results for SJ types. 

As was pointed out for substanee abuse data, there are 
limitations on generalizing hypertension and heart disease 
data that were collected primarily on samples that appeared 


in treatment programs, although evidence from the Con- 
sulting Psychologists Press national sample gives some cre- 
dence to these treatment program results. The “responsi- 
ble” SJ types are not likely to show behaviors that college 
officials associate with actual or potential substance abuse. 
The education results in this table pinpoint the tendency of 
many types who include a preference for Sensing to excel 
in performance-based assessments of competence as com- 
pared with test-based measures. The remaining results in 
Table 4.12 appear consistent with what might be expected 
for people who introvert Sensing and extravert their pre- 
ferred judging process. 


SPs: The Adaptable Realists 





All four Sensing Pereeiving types extravert Sensing, 
regardless of whether it is dominant (ESTP, ESFP) or 


50 Theory 








Table 4.12 Research Describing SJ Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Education 





Overrepresented in both male and female samples of coronary heart disease patients! 
Underrepresented among new college students required to attend a substance abuse workshop? 


e,» —————— = ———— V————————————— "—————— 


Underrepresented among six small private "student-centered" high schools? 


Scored lower on the National Teacher Exam than would be predicted by their classroom performance? 


Females more likely to persist in school in a large sample of engineering school students? 


Overrepresented among female school administrators in the People's Republic of China? 


Overrepresented among Chinese and Chinese-Filipino students of language at the University of Hawaii? 


More frequent among African American students? 


Careers 


y 2 are soap vi ~G. t ox a ST o m s z-- Tema T3 ^ Ln pae MEET Qt 


Among elementary school teachers, more satisfied with the supervision they received? 


Frequent among pharmacists, medical technologists, and teachers, especially in the lower grades 


Among physicians, had “maintaining consistent and predictable schedule and performing habitual 


— ` ——À a Trai —— — TE 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


activities" as work setting characteristics? 


ne mom remm Lent ee 





cutn D'aCHOROES M aem D FEE G 


Developed significantly fewer possible solutions than NJs and found the fewest figures in the 
embedded figures test in problem-solving study’ 


COOILUUIERCIURDUROLÁLYICWUWPEGM IST I DS cewDCGe E Geo UT HUNC LONECUMUCGCEEN NR NEL UDIN PWOTOUA CUN ARMS TS C MENU UDUMDC MUN RR RR RE 
Source: Shelton, 1996; ^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ?DiTiberio, 1996; + Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996; Hammer, 1996a: Myers and McCaulley, 1985; ^Walck, 1996. 


auxiliary (ISTP, ISFP), and introvert their preferred judging 
tunction, Thinking or Feeling. The process of extraverting 
Sensing involves directing one's energy and attention 
outwardly, noticing sights, sounds, smells, touch, human 
reactions—in short, everything present—in great detail 
and accurately. Ones focus is on intensely experiencing 
what is happening in the present and on seeking 
stimulation through the variety and vividness of one's 
sensations. When extraverting Sensing, one's goal is to 
experience as much as possible by having an unending 
variety of Sensing experience. 

The effects of extraverting Sensing can be seen in the way 
SP types are described. They tend to seek new experiences in 
the present moment and are curious about the world around 
them. They adapt to situations as they arise and are good 
observers of the immediate situation. SPs are attracted to 
work that focuses on attending to facts and details in the 
immediate environment. They are relatively uninterested in 
the long-range aspects or implications of what they do. They 
are stimulus-seekers and flourish when they can experience 
a great deal of external stimulation. Table 4.13 summarizes 
rclevant research results for SP types. 

Table 4.13 highlights some of the ways in which some 
types do not have "equal opportunity" in the educational 
sphere. ESTP, ESFP, ISTP, and ISFP types tend to be active, 
hands-on learners, and their particular ways of learning 
and demonstrating intellectual competence are not ac- 
commodated well in standard educational programs and 
in standard measures of achievement. Like the ST types 
(Table 4.4), when assessed using a performance measure 
(the Academic Decathlon) rather than a standardized test 


measure, they fare better than would be expected from 
some of the other data. Results like these encourage 
recognition that the competence of SP types may often 
go unrecognized throughout our educational system and 
that this chronic problem may well influence both their 
motivation toward and opportunities for receiving the 
higher education needed [or the careers where they 
appear infrequently. 


NPs: The Adaptable Innovators 


I 
EN ENFP|ENTP 


All four Intuitive Perceiving (NP) types extravert Intuition, 
regardless of whether it is their dominant (ENFP, ENTP) or 
auxiliary (INFP, INTP) function, and introvert their 
preferred judging function, Thinking or Feeling. The 
process of extraverting Intuition involves scanning the 
outer world for whatever is new—new ideas, new people, 
or new possibilities—with an aim of changing and 
reshaping the environment. Ones focus is on exploring and 
experiencing the world in all its potentialities. When 
extraverting Intuition, one's goal is to find and explore 
possibilities through new and exciting challenges. 







Understanding the 16 Types 51 








Table 4.13 Research Describing SP Types 





Personality, Psychotherapy, Overrepresented among male hypertensive patients! 
Health, Stress, Coping 
Education Overrepresented among least decided in a study of career decisiveness among undergraduates in 
ez 
education 


Higher percentage of undergraduates failed the Texas Academic Program Test than any other 
combination 


Notably missing among teachers at all levels of education? 


Overrepresented among Academic Decathlon participants compared with their proportion among 
National Merit Finalists? 








Overrepresented among Hawaiian students of language at the University of Hawaii? 
More frequent among African American students* 
Careers Research not available 
Organizations, Leadership, Maintained high interest throughout a production simulation that required learning well-defined, 
Management,Teams structured procedures? 
Source: !Shelton, 1996; “Hammer, 1996a: ?DrTibenio, 1996, *Kirby &amp; Barger, 1990, Walck, 1996. 
Table 4.14 Research Describing NP Types 
Personality, Psychotherapy, Overrepresented among female substance abusers! 
Health, Stress, Coping Underrepresented among both male and female chronic pain patients? 
Education Overrepresented among six small private "student-centered" high schools? 
Outscored SJ types on vocabulary in a study of specific learning tasks? 
Careers Facet-specific job satisfaction results for elementary and secondary school teachers mentioned 


"trying their own methods"? 
Had a higher turnover rate compared with SJs in a working environment conducive to SJs^ 


amr ^ - ^ = os ~ s - —X 





Organizations, Leadership, Did better than other groupings at embedded figures task? 
Management,Teams 


Source: lOuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ?Shelton. 1996; J0iTiberio, 1996; * Hammer. 19962; ?Walck, 1996. 


The process of extraverting Intuition is reflected in the performance on a task like the embedded figures test also 
way NP types are described. They constantly seck the chal- contributes to their lower incidence among chronic pain 
lenge of the unknown and adapt to new possibilities as they patients. 


arise. They are unconventional, independent spirits who 
hate to be fenced in. They enjoy seeking new solutions for — NJs: The Visionary Decision Makers 
both old and new problems and like the challenge of the 
apparently impossible or the very difficult, especially in the 
realm of possibilities in the world. 

Table 4.14 summarizes the few resulis available for NP 
types. The results seem consistent with the qualities associ- 
ated with extraverting a perceiving function. However, à 
number of hypotheses could be developed regarding differ- 
ential results for these types as chronie pain patients. Per- 
haps the same kind of flexibility that may contribute to 





| BEEN 


Table 4.15 Research Describing NJ Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Education Research not available 
Careers 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 





Underrepresented among male hypertensive patients! 


Overrepresented among those having Type A behavior! 


Overrepresented among freshman dental students? 


Developed more possible solutions to the Dunker box problem than SJs? 


Source’ I Shelton, 1996; ^DiTiberio, 1996, 5wWalck, 1996. 


All four Introverted Judging (IJ) types introvert Intuition, 
rcgardless of whether it is their dominant (INFJ, INTJ) or 
auxiliary (ENFJ, ENTJ) function, and extravert their 
preferred judging function, Thinking or Feeling. The process 
of introverting Intuition involves attending to unconscious 
images and connections to develop new patterns and ways of 
seeing things. Ones focus is on changing and reshaping the 
environment to bring into being one's inner vision and 
insight through finding patterns and meaning in the world. 
When introverting Intuition, one’s goal is to develop inner 
intuitive patterns for understanding the world. 

The process of introverting Intuition is reflected in the 
way NJ types are typically described. They strive to accom- 
plish the goals of their inner vision and are driving, persis- 
tent, and determined. They can be charismatic leaders who 
attract dedicated followers. They have the ability to present 
their inner vision in a compelling, convincing way by fram- 
ing it in terms of either long-range logical conscquences or 
long-range impact on important values. 

As is apparent from Table 4.15, NJ types seem to be one 
of the combinations that research and/or researchers find of 
little interest, as compared to the other three combinations 
in this grouping. The reported under- and overrepresenta- 
tions among hypertensive patients and Type A behavior are 
similar to those observed for NT types (Table 4.7) and arc 
as difficult to interpret without further study. 


Combinations of Judgment and Orientations 
to the Outer World: TJ, TP, FP, and FJ 


The grouping of types TJ, TP, FP. and FJ identifies types that 
use the same judging function in the same attitude of Extra- 
version or Introversion, regardless of whether their judging 
function ts dominant or auxiliary in their type. A focus on 
this grouping allows us to understand the different dynam- 
ics involved in the processes of extraverting Thinking (char- 
acteristic of TJ types) as compared with introverting Think- 
ing (characteristic of TP types) and introverting Feeling 
(characteristic of FP types) as compared with extraverting 
Feeling (characteristic of FJ types). A discussion of these 
important differences is included in each ol the four scc- 
tions that describe common dynamic elements. 


A notable feature of this grouping is the fact that a table 
of research results is provided only for the first combina- 
tion, the TJ types. No table of research results describing 
TPs, FPs, or FJs is included because very few reports of 
rescarch were found within the constraints for inclusion of 
results. The few results available are therefore provided in 
narrative form only. The fact that research results are 
reported primarily for the T] combination in this grouping 
may reflect the unique qualities that permit them to be 
described as “executive” types, a status that is generally 
highly valued in our culture. In contrast, the TPs, FPs, and 
FJs hold no similar consistently valued position. 


TJs: The Logical Decision Makers 





All four Thinking Judging types extravert Thinking, rc- 
gardless of whether it is the dominant (ESTJ, ENTJ) or 
auxiliary (ISTJ, INTJ) function, and introvert their preferred 
perceiving function, Sensing or Intuition. The process of 
extraverting Thinking involves seeking to bring order to 
ones external environment, which is accomplished through 
expressing thoughts and judgments with directness and 
clatity. Ones focus is on critiquing systems, procedures, and 
ideas so that consequences can be anticipated and acted 
upon quickly. When extraverting Thinking, ones goal is to 
create logical order in the external world by making the 
outer environment rational. 

The process of extraverting Thinking is apparent in the 
way TJ types are described. These occupants of the four 
corners of the type table are tough-minded, executive, ana- 
lytical, and instrumental leaders. They readily take on 
leadership roles in whatever setting they are in, and they 


Understanding the 16 Types 





Table 4.16 Research Describing TJ Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


—————— 2 — 


Education 


eum af bie Petite e Ra 7 a Fn mmn 


Careers 


[nte WEE. n] 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


53 


Overrepresented among students preferring cognitive approaches to psychotherapy; underrepresented 


for affective approaches, except for ESTJs! 
Underrepresented among male hypertensive patients? 
Overrepresented among those having Type A behavior? 


Overrepresented among freshman dental students? 
Overrepresented among female school administrators in the Peoples Republic of China? 


Overrepresented among Chinese, Chinese American, mainland Chinese, and Taiwanese students of 
language at the University of Hawaii* 


Frequent among health care executives? 


ETJ types had a more positive sense of well-being than did non-T] types? 


Most strongly reject T-group norms hypothesized as E, N, F, and PÉ 
NTJs both most successful and most unsuccessful at running high-tech firms in a study of business 


founders 


STJs more likely to be high performers in a study of high school principals 


Ss Zo MNA MD ee EUR a mH ee 2 CUN UU ee TC Oa ea ca more Wu Dae UT ui 


Source: l Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; “shelton, 1996; ?DiTiberio, 1996; Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996. ?Hammer, 1996a, 5walck, 1996. 


communicate their confidence in the viability and primacy of 
focusing on logical outcomes. TJs are seen as confident, in 
control, and able to implement decisions quickly and effec- 
tively. They can easily impose a logical organizational struc- 
ture in a situation with the goal of effective problem solv- 
ing. TJs may be seen bv others as hypercritical, too quick to 
judge and act, and tactless in their style of communication, 
which tends to be direct and to the point. They generally 
use categorical statements that represent logical conclu- 
sions and avoid modifying terms such as may, tends to, or 
gcnerally. Table 4.16 summarizes relevant research results 
for TJ types. 

As noted earlier, ihe TJ combination is the only one of 
this grouping for which research results are available. The 
research shown in Table 4.16 is mostly consistent with 
what we would expect for people who extravert Thinking, 
for example, in their preference for cognitive rather than 
affective approaches in psychotherapy. The same results 
regarding hypertension and Type A behavior that were 
found for NJ and NT types are reported here. Observations 
in the areas of education, careers, and organizations present 
no surprises in this table. 


TPs: The Adaptable Thinkers 





All four Thinking Perceiving types introvert Thinking, 
regardless of whether it is their dominant (ISTP, INTP) or 
auxiliary (ESTP, ENTP) function, and extravert their 
preferred perceiving function, Sensing or Intuition. The 
process of introverting Thinking involves seeking to order 
one’s internal thoughts through developing a logical system 
for understanding. Ones focus is on using reflective 
observation to critique reality and identify the inconsistencies 
and irrelevancies often overlooked by others. When 
introverting Thinking, one’s goal is to create logical order by 
developing rational principles for understanding the world. 

The process of introverting Thinking ean be observed in 
the way TP types are deseribed. They are objective, skeptical, 
observant, and enrious, especially about materials, events, or 
possibilities that have or can be made to fit into consistent and 
orderly frameworks. They can be effective trouble-shooters 
with the ability to hone in on the essence of problems and 
find logical solutions for them. They are able to consider a 
broad range of facts, details, or ideas in order to come to the 
most accurate conclusion and are unlikely to rule anything 
out arbitrarily, regardless of how unorthodox or unlikely it 
may seem to others. Because their Thinking is introverted. 
others may have difficulty following the logic in their shifts of 
focus and changes in direction when they are deeply involved 
in a project. The internal logic may seem so obvious to a TP 
that he or she will assume that everyone clse sees it too. 

With regard to research deseribing TP types, in the national 
sample they were found to be overrepresented among new 
college students referred to a substance abuse workshop 
(Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996). As observed for certain other 
combinations, the “typologically associated” behaviors that 
college officials believe portend substance abuse are not con- 
firmed among those who actually appear in substance abuse 
treatment programs. TP types are overrepresented among 


54 Theory 





Hawaiian students of language at the University of Hawaii and 
are more frequent among African American students (Kirby &amp; 
Barger, 1996). In a study of career decisiveness (Hammer, 
19962), they were overrepresented among undergraduate 
education students who were classified as least decided, a 
result consistent with TP types' possible pursuit of a career 
that fulfills both their desire for using dispassionate analysis 
and their desire for a good deal of flexibility and freedom. 


FPs: The Gentle Types 





L 
| 
+ 
i 


fs: 





All four Feeling Perceiving (FP) types introvert Feeling, 
regardless of whether it is the dominant (ISFP, INFP) or 
auxiliary (ESFP, ENFP) function in their personality. The 
process of introverting Feeling involves seeking an intense, 
meaningful, and complex inner life through being attuned to 
possible contradictions between ones inner values and one’s 
outer life. The focus is on clarifying and maintaining the 
consistency of one’s own valucs and actions, although their 
intensity may seldom be expressed to others. When intro- 
verting Feeling, one’ goal is io identify an inner core of values 
and establish an external life that is congruent with them. 

The process of introverting Feeling is evident in the way 
FP types are described. They are adaptable, affiliative har- 
mony seekers who are concerned with the human aspects 
of problems. They often have a knack for enlisting support 
from others, communicating a sincerity that promotes lik- 
ing and trust. They welcome others' ideas and genuinely 
appreciate the contributions people make. Because their 
Feeling function is introverted, however, others may not be 
aware of the central values that motivate FPs until one of 
those values is attacked or disregarded. At such times, the 
typical flexibility and acceptance of an FP can change to 
stubborn insistence on doing things the “right” way. 

Relevant research for FP types indicates that they were 
underrepresented among those having Type A behavior 
(Shelton, 1996). Possible contributing factors are difficult 
to explore in the absence of additional information. 


Fs: The Benevolent Administrators 





All four Feeling Judging (FJ) types extravert Feeling, 
regardless of whether it is the dominant or auxiliary 
function in their type. The process of extraverting Feeling 
involves secking smooth and harmonious relationships 
with everyone in one’s environment through being highly 
attuned to people's desires and expectations. The focus is 
on organizing and structuring the environment to meet 
people's needs and to facilitate the achievement of 
individual and group goals. When extraverting Feeling, 
one's goal is to create harmony and cooperation in the 
external environment and to facilitate others in getting 
what they need and want. The process of extraverting 
Feeling is often misjudged as excessive emotionality. 
When a person is extraverting Feeling, important values 
are expressed with the goal of ensuring that those values 
become actualized in the world. Strong affect often ac- 
companies this expression but is secondary to the actu- 
alization of personal values. 

The process of extraverting Feeling can be seen in the 
way FJs are described. They are observant about people and 
their needs and are often expressive leaders. They expend 
energy trying to make people happy and bringing harmony 
into relationships. They may be erroneously judged as 
overly accommodating and even codependent, since their 
extraversion of Feeling involves bringing harmony into the 
outer world. In fact, at times they may risk overcommit- 
ment to others’ welfare, which may prove stressful when 
they attempt to honor and fulfill all important obligations. 
FJs are generally quite loyal to others who share important 
values and goals and may judge those who deviate from 
those personal values in negative, sometimes harsh ways. 
Including others and being included is an important value 
that, when not met, may lead the FJ to experience a sense of 
failure and hurt feelings. 

Available research indicates that FJs were overrepre- 
sented among Filipino students in a study comparing lan- 
guage students at the University of Hawaii (Kirby &amp; 
Barger, 1996) and were also frequently found in the clergy 
(Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). This latter result has been 
found in numerous studies. 


Combinations of Orientation of Energy 
and Perception: IS, ES, IN, EN 


The grouping of IN, EN, IS, and ES is referred to as “the 
quadrants” because these types make up the four quadrants 
of the type table. The quadrants combine the functions of 
pereeption (Sensing and Intuition) with the Extraverted or 
Introverted attitude. Note that the types in these quadrants 
are appropriately deseribed as having Extraversion or Intro- 
version with Sensing or Intuition. For example, the four 
types in the IN quadrant are deseribed as having Introver- 
sion with Intuition beeause the grouping does not refer toa 
dynamic commonality, beyond the fact that Intuition is 
either the dominant or the auxiliary function for these four 
types. The same style of designation is used for the other 
three quadrants. 


Table 4.17 Research Describing IS Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Overrepresented among females in a substance abuse program 


Understanding the 16 Types 55 





More likely to be substance abusers! 
Overrepresented among male substance abusers! 


Underrepresented among new college students referred to a substance abuse workshop! 


Overrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program 


2 


Overrepresented among male hypertensive patients” 


Overrepresented among males diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder? 





Education 


— — — -ox = z -— 


Careers Research not available 


d 


Organizations, Leadership, Research not available 


Management, Teams 


In national sample, highest ranked on "Ever had heart disease/hypertension'? 


Thinking types who were also ISs had higher grades in a study of 2,713 undergraduates? 





Source: Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; Shelton, 1996, ? 


ISs: The Thoughtful Realists 





Introverts with Sensing (15s) like to test ideas to see whether 
they are supported by facts. They like to deal with what is 
real and factual in a careful, unhurried way and can become 
frustrated and irritable when they feel rushed and unable to 
devote adequate attention to the task at hand. They do not 
put themselves forward and prefer to stay in the 
background of projects and activities. Their efforts and 
accomplishments can easily be overlooked or taken for 
granted by others. Regardless of whether their Sensing is 
dominant and introverted (ISTJ, ISFJ) or auxiliary and 
extraverted (ISTP, ISFP), they are likely to aveid leadership 
roles and may experience considerable discomfort when 
forced into such roles. The stress of leading may come to 
overshadow and diminish their satisfaction with other, 
enjoyable aspects of their environment. Their quict and 
persistent workstyle and dislike of leadership demands may 
further draw attention away from their quiet but often 
significant contributions at home and at work. Table 4.17 
summarizes relevant research results for IS types. 

It seems likely that the kinds ol situations that appear to 
be quite stressful for the four IS types contribute to the 
results seen in Table 4.17 that show overrepresentations in 
the areas of substance abuse, as cardiac and hypertensive 
patients, and in being diagnosed with post-traumatic stress 
disorder. Bear in mind, however, that the results listed may 


See Chapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”, *DiTibeno, 1996, 


be limited by the samples available for study. It is particu- 
larly noteworthy, therefore, that previously found associa- 
tions between being an IS type and overrepresentation in 
cardiac and hypertensive groups were confirmed in the 
national sample study, whose subjects were not selected for 
any particular disorder. The implications of this finding are 
discussed in Chapter 10. 

As in previous tables, it is interesting that the IS types are 
less frequently referred as substance abuse risks in college but 
based on these data appear more frequenily in substance 
abuse groups. We might conjecture that college officials are 
attending to the “wrong” signs and behaviors in their 
attempts to identify at-risk students. It is also possible that IS 
types are truly not at risk while in school but that the later 
stresses ol adult life and the workplace promote this and 
other stress-stimulated conditions. The fast-paced, frequently 
changing, and multiple external demands of todays work 
environment do not necessarily permit IS types to function in 
their most comfortable ways. Future research may better pin- 
point the complex and likely interacting variables involved. 

As four types who are most comfortable when keeping 
to the background of their environments, it is not surpris- 
ing that there are few reports of notable characteristics in 
the areas of education, careers, and organizations. 


INs: The Thoughtful Innovators 





56 Theory 


Table 4.18 Research Describing IN Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Overrepresented among students preferring cognitive approaches to psychotherapy; 
underrepresented for affective approaches! 


Underrepresented among behavioral psychologists, except for INTPs! 


More likely to be substance abusers 
More likely to be overrepresented among female substance abusers 
Underrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program 
nicucpis nen among male hypertensive uos 


n a ra he n tee eT e qe T Tem m Pe PIS 


€———Á p——————  À 





Education 
undergraduates? 


Among middle school students, performed better than ES types on a series of academic aptitude tests 


l 

| 

2 
2 


ST ET Ah HER Pg a 7 III cr Boer DIRE a EEERUED Dot 


Obtained higher grades in courses that were abstract and theoretical in a study of 2,713 


3 


Among student dental hygienists, performed worse than ES or IS students? 


Obtained higher geometry achievement scores among rural high school students? 


Overrepresented among academically gifted junior high students? 


Males more likely to persist in engineering schoo? 


a os higher Siete if mey were ae oe types, in a d of 2,713 MAREE 


— pn——v————————— M ————————— ———— S ———M— 


Careers 


EISE secondary aede swa teachers, were ele satisfied* 


Tti s qa tte m y PIT tss 





———— ^ e A memet 


Organizations, Leadership Research not available 


Management,Teams 


3 


———————————————— ————————— ——— n 





Except for INFJs were most dissatisfied of the types with future work opportunities and/or their work? 


—————— 


minim e tet Re SP ns lg imn te netta DD E t t 





Source lOuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ?7Shelton. 1996; 3 i Tibeno, 1996, *Hammer, 199643. 


Introverts with Intuition (INs) are introspective and 
scholarly. They are interested in knowledge for its own sake, 
as well as ideas, theory, and depth of understanding. They 
are the least practical of the types, preferring the complexity 
of theory to the pragmatism of accomplishments in the 
world. Regardless of whether their Intuition is dominant 
and introverted (INFJ, INTJ) or auxiliary and extraverted 
(INFP, INTP), these types enjoy and seek out each others 
company, feeling affirmed in their intellectual or philo- 
sophical interests and in their disinterest in and sometimes 
disdain for the practical world that seems to be so attractive 
to other types. They may be judged by others as too serious 
and as missing out on many of the activities and experiences 
available in the outside world. Table 4.18 summarizes 
relevant research results for IN types. 

Like the IS types, the four IN types appear in substance 
abuse samples. However, unlike the IS types, they are reported 
as underrepresented among cardiac and hypertensive 
patients. The national sample studies reported in Chapter 10 
generally support these earlier results in that the percentage 
of the four IN types who report heart disease or hypertension 
is considerably lower than for the four IS types. 

As types who are very serious academically, the results 
shown in Table 4.18 in the education area are not surprising. 
The intellectual sphere is often “home” for IN types. It is 
therefore reasonable that, except for INFJ, they are the types 


most likely to report one or more ways in which they are dis- 
satished with their work lives. Careers and jobs that allow 
people to devote the majority of their time to intellectual 
pursuits are relatively uncommon in the modern workplace. 

That IN types performed worse as student dental hygien- 
ists than ES or IS students highlights the areas in which IN 
types are competent as well as those where IS and ES types 
excel. Such a result is certainly in accord with expectations 
from type theory, as is the lesser satisfaction of INs in teach- 
ing marketing. 


ESs: The Action-Oriented Realists 





Extraverts with Sensing (ESs) are active, realistic doers and 
are the most practical of the types. They learn best when 
uscful applications are obvious. They enjoy the material 
world and devote attention to the appearance of things, both 


Table 4.19 Research Describing ES Types 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Underrepresented among female substance abusers 
Underrepresented among male substance abusers 


Underrepresented among females in a substance abuse program 


a eet Ape Potts eheu ee — 


Education 


Male ESTs married the most number of times of all combinations 
Males less likely to be substance abusers 


Underrepresented among patients in a cardiac rehabilitation program 


Obtained higher grades in practical and applied courses in a study of 2,713 undergraduates 


Understanding the 16 Types 57 





| 

l 

| 

| 

| 

2 


— — A e 


3 


Performed worse than IN types on a series of academic aptitude tests among middle school students? 


Overrepresented among female school administrators in the People’s Republic of China? 


Overrepresented among Hawaiian students of language at the University of Hawaii 


Careers 


Grades were higher for Thinking types who were also ESs in a study of 2,713 undergraduates 


—!—[Ó n Fir at Ee a A MENS cl lA YT eI EE ERE ed —— =e z - 


4 
3 





Among pharmacists had greater overall satisfaction with occupation and greater number of 


relationships between type preferences and specific job duties? 


T Mc me E Ce == = = = somite r an 


Organizations, Leadership, Research not available 


Management, Teams 


Deen al EE m n emp — 


ings -——————— ai = L—- 


: 2. | " y 5 
Source: lOuenk &amp; Quenk. 1996, “Shelton, 1996, 3D} Iiberio, 1996, "Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996; ?Hammer, 1996a 


aesthetically and from a practical, utilitarian perspective. The 
pleasure and accomplishment involved in experiencing as 
much of the world as is possible can be a persistent goal of 
ESs, and they may go to some effort to scek out particular 
interesting places, activities, modes of travel, and experiences. 
Regardless of whether their Sensing is extraverted and 
dominant (ESTP, ESFP) or introverted and auxiliary (EST], 
ESFJ), the types in this quadrant typically appear confident of 
their relationship to the world and all it contains. Tahle 4.19 
summarizes relevant research results for ES types. 

There are striking differences between the types in the 
ES and IS quadrants with regard to substance abuse and 
cardiac problems. Perhaps the ESs’ enthusiasm and opti- 
mism about the outer world enables them to welcome life 
experiences that seem particularly stressful for IS types. 
Their practicality in the world can also be seen in their 
greater achievement in practical and applied courses than 
in academic areas. The results for pharmacists suggest that 
this field may be particularly fulfilling for types who eom- 
bine Extraversion with a Sensing preference. 


ENs: The Action-Oriented Innovators 





Extraverts with Intuition (ENs) are change agents; they sce 
possibilities as challenges to make something happen. They 
have wide-ranging interests and like to see new patterns and 
relationships. Like the types in the ES quadrant, ENs are 
comfortable with and excited by their interactions with the 
outer world but are morc future oriented in their pursuits 
and goals. Regardless of whether their Intuition is dominant 
and extraverted (ENFP, ENTP) or auxiliary and introverted 
(ENFJ, ENTJ), these four types share a vision of future 
potentialities in the world, whether for people, structures, 
institutions, or the general luture of human activities. 

As found in previous tables, Table 4.20 reveals that col- 
lege student EN types were seen as at risk for substance 
abuse but in fact appeared less frequently in one treatment 
group and were less frequent in a cardiac treatment pro- 
gram. Like the IS types, this grouping has not yiclded many 
reportable results in the areas of careers and organizations. 
A possible contributing factor is that the four whole types 
ENFP ENTP ENFJ, and ENTJ—may be quite divergent in 
their career behavior and organizational pursuits and 
behaviors. 





Combinations of Orientation of Energy 
and Judgment: ET, ER IE and IT 


This grouping, like that of E and I with the perceiving func- 
tions, does not identify dynamic entities but rather identi- 
fies the combination of an attitude with a judging function, 
which may be either the dominant or the auxiliary function. 
None of the four combinations in this grouping yielded 
many research results, and research is therefore summa- 
rized in narrative rather than tabular lorm. 


58 Theory 


Table 4.20 Research Describing EN Types 
Personality, Psychotherapy, 


Males ENTs married the fewest number of times 


Overrepresented among new college students referred to a substance abuse workshop! 


Health, Stress, Coping Underrepresented among male substance abusers 

Underrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program 
Education 
Careers 


Research not available 


A ee ut rt ale p e a S I E po ipae n e ten 


Organizations, Leadership, Research not available 


Management, Teams 


Grades were higher for Thinking types who were also ENs in a study of 2,713 undergraduates 


VIRA 22-57 aa NN ET aE nh TE a e M TS tail e a o n SR 


2 


ESPECIE pf lg «nu peat t Pet s a 05 TS DRIER, 


3 


ee a a 





a » = as m . aa De S De mei —— 





Source lOuenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; *Shelton, 1996; ?DrTibeno, 1996 


ETs: The Action-Oriented Thinkers 





Extraverts with Thinking (ETs) are active and energetic. 
They are objective and like to make things happen in 
reasoned, analytical, and logical ways. They expect the same 
approach from others. Regardless of whether their Thinking 
is dominant and extraverted (ESTJ, ENTJ) or auxiliary and 
introverted (ESTP, ENTP), these four types share an ex- 
pectation that they themselves and those around them 
should be confident, competent, and effective. ETs can be 
impatient and annoyed with others self-doubt, hesitation, 
and low self-confidence. In consequence, Feeling types in 
particular may experience ETs as harsh, unsympathetic, and 
intolerant of others’ needs. 

Research shows that ETs are overrepresented among 
female administrators in the Peoples Republic of China 
(Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996). 


EFs: The Action-Oriented Cooperators 





Extraverts with Feeling (EFs) are sociable, friendly, and 
sympathetic. They like to make things happen for the 


pleasure or welfare of others. They focus on liking others 
and being liked and on connecting people with each other. 
All are sensitive to the nuances of emotion that they pick 
up from those around them, and they find it hard to 
function at their best when thcy are in an environment 
characterized by frequent conflict and divisiveness. 
Regardless of whether their Feeling is dominant and 
extraverted (ESFJ, ENFJ) or auxiliary and introverted 
(ESFP, ENFP), EF types try to defuse contentious sit- 
uations or mediate among people who are at odds with 
each other. The restoration of harmony is not only a strong 
value for them; it may also be a necessary condition that 
enables them to remain in any situation. 
No relevant research was found for EF types. 


IFs: The Reflective Harmonizers 





Introverts with Feeling (IFs) are quict and caring. They 
have concern for deep and enduring values, as well as for 
pcople and the way people feel. Regardless ol whether their 
Feeling is dominant and introverted (ISFP, INFP) or 
auxiliary and extraverted (ISFJ, INFJ), these types feel 
things quite intensely and in a manner that can sometimes 
be puzzling 1o others. The depth of feeling about individual 
values can make them appear overly serious and ex- 
ccssively sensitive to their own and others' emotional state. 
Unlike the EFs, who strive to correct disharmony when 
they find it, IFs are likely to withdraw from such situations 
rather than deal directly with the distressing feelings that 
exist in the situation. 
No relevant research was found for IF types. 


ITs: The Reflective Reasoners 





Introverts with Thinking (TIs) are quiet and contemplative. 
They have concern for basic principles that explain the 
causes and consequences of events or the workings of things. 
ITs are the most removed from daily social intercourse and 
are the slowest to develop social skills. They tend to be 
indifferent to or dislike small-talk and may find many social 
interactions unwelcome and stressful. They can be seen as 
socially awkward or may come across as overly formal and 
even unfriendly. Regardless of whether their Thinking is 
introverted and dominant (ISTP, INTP) or auxiliary and 
extraverted (ISTJ, INTJ), these types are natural and en- 
thusiastic critics of whatever is being presented. The intro- 
verted approach they take while evaluating and critiquing 
contributes to their shared tendency to maintain an im- 
passive facial expression and body language that seems to 
convey disapproval or disregard of others. As a result, they 
may be seen, often erroneously, as overly critical, disdainful, 
or, at best, uninterested in what is going on. 

In research, ITs were found to be overrepresented among 
males diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder (Shel- 
ton, 1996). 


Combinations That Describe 
the Four Temperaments: SJ, SP NF, NT 





Two of the combinations of the functions and two of the 
combinations of perception and orientation to the outer 
world are used by temperament theorists and researchers to 
identify the four temperaments—sanguine, choleric, phleg- 
matic, and melancholic—originally proposed as a descriptive 
system by the Greek philosopher Hippocrates (460-377 
p.c.). These were developed and described in modern form 
by David Keirsey and Marilyn Bates (1978) and further 
extended and refined by Linda Berens. The temperaments are 
identified as Guardian, Artisan, Idealist, and Rationalist. 
Keirsey and Bates found that selectively combining Intuition 


Understanding the 16 Types 59 


with the two judging functions (NF and NT) and Sensing 
with Myers’ two orientations to the outer world (SJ and SP) 
produced a descriptive personality system similar to the four 
temperaments Hippocrates described centuries earlier. Mod- 
ern temperament theorists, therefore, use selected type con- 
structs that are identified by answering the MBTI in order to 
approximate the constructs specified by temperament theory, 





It is important to recognize that temperament theory is not a 
variant of type theory, nor is type theory a variant of tem- 
perament theory. 





Type theory and temperament theory are two separate sys- 
tems for explaining personality that are independent of each 
other in origin, in the number and kind of basic elements 
each hypothesizes, and in the way each theorys elements are 
combined. For example, temperament theory does not 
require the E-I dichotomy for its explanatory system and 
does not postulate the dynamic hierarchy and interaction of 
functions that form the essence of type theory. Temperament 
theory proposes that four qualitatively different broad cate- 
gories describe major, fundamental aspects of personality. 
However, temperament theorists recognize finer distinctions 
than the four broad categories and ultimately refer to [6 pat- 
terns. Type theory proposes 16 categories for completeness, 
with many more commonalities among the types than are 
proposed in temperament theory. Both type and tempera- 
ment theory share a common goal of identifying, describing, 
and appreciating individual differences in personality that 
emerge from a set of theoretical constructs. 

A number of people who were initially interested in the 
temperament approach have become familiar with type the- 
ory because of the use of selected type constructs to describe 
the temperaments. Their understanding of the temperaments 
has been enhanced by knowledge of the 16 types and their 
dynamic characteristics. Some people who began with type 
theory have become familiar with temperament theory 
because of the apparent similarity in constructs. A valuable 
contribution of temperament theory to type theory is the 
clarification of the important differences between Extra- 
verted Sensing and Introverted Sensing. To meet the interests 
of practitioners concerned with both theories, the following 
section discusses the combinations of type preferences that 
describe the four temperaments and summarizes relevant 
research about this theory of personality. 

The four temperaments are typically described in terms 
of their distinctive core needs and values and their talcnts. 
The descriptions that follow focus on these areas.! 


SJ Temperament: Guardian The Guardian's core needs are 
for group membership and responsibility. Guardians need to 
know they are doing the responsible thing. They value 
stability, security, and a sense of community. They trust 
hierarchy and authority and may be surprised when others go 
against these. Guardians prefer cooperative actions with a 
foeus on standards and norms. Their orientation is to their 


60 Theorv 


Table 4.21 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Research not available 


Tended to be left brain dominant in a study of brain dominance among technical institute learners 


Research Describing SJ Temperament 


= a 


Scored lower than other three temperaments combined on the Test of Standard Written English but 


Ranked third among chemical engineering students ranked from highest to lowest order of passing by 


Scored lower on the National Teacher Exam than would be predicted by their classroom performance! 


Females more likely to persist in school in a large sample of engineering schoo! students! 


Overrepresented among female school administrators in the People’s Republic of China! 


Overrepresented among Chinese students and Chinese-Filipino students in study comparing language 


Tem cuan ee má o RD Iun S Me tie ETRE M Puto ue eh MER Doa m mtt tsm rm ne o IB mn Rp mt BS a Met c 


Education 
not found to be lower in their grades! 
temperaments! 
Underrepresented among six small private "student-centered" high schools! 
students at the University of Hawaii? 
More frequent among African American students? 
Careers 


Job satisfaction especially high when facets of jobs were theoretically related to their SJ style? 


Among elementary school teachers, more satisfied with the supervision they received? 


Frequent among pharmacists, medical technologists, and teachers, especially in the lower grades? 


Among physicians, had "maintaining consistent and predictable schedule" and "performing habitual 


activities" as work setting characteristics 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


3 


»- — ao a 


Developed significantly fewer possible solutions than NJs and found the fewest figures in the 
embedded figures test in problem-solving study? 





Note: Some of the research results listed in Tables 4.21—4.24 were previously included in tables of the grouping SJ. SP NJ, NP and the grouping ST, SE NT, 
NE Research included in those tables was not specifically looking at the temperament grouping but is nevertheless relevant to temperament descriptions. 
sowce: ! DiTiberio, 1996; “Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996; Hammer, 19962; "Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, AWalck. 1996. 


past experiences, and they like things sequenced and 
structured. Guardians tend to look for the practical appli- 
cations of what they are learning. They are usually talented at 


logistics and at maintaining useful traditions. They 


masterfully get the right thirigs in the right place at the right 
time in the right quantity to the right people and not to the 
wrong people. Guardians know how things have always been 
done, so they anticipate where things can go wrong. They 
have a knack lor attending to rules, proceedures, and protocol. 
Table 4.21 summarizes relevant research results for the SJ 
temperament. Note that the research results previously 
reported for SJ, SP, NE and NT combinations from a typo- 
logical perspective are repeated in Tables 4.21—4.24, along 
with research that specifically studied the four temperaments. 

Results in the education area highlight the faet that most 
educational environments do not recognize the learning 
style and competencies of people with an SJ temperament. 
But actual performance rather than standardized test mea- 
sures gives a more positive picture of their intellectual com- 
petence. Results relating to multicultural overrepresenta- 
tions are addressed in Chapter 14. 

Career data for the SJ temperament confirm that careers 
and work environments that maximize the opportunity to 
use their preferred approach are more satisfying and that SJs 
are attracted to careers and work activities that would be 
predicted from knowledge of their temperament. 


SP Temperament: Artisan The Artisans core needs are to 
have the freedom to act without hindrance and to see a 
marked result from action. Artisans highly value aesthetics, 
whether in nature or in art. Their energies are focused on 
skillful performance, variety, and stimulation. They tend 
toward pragmatic, utilitarian actions with a focus on 
technique. Thev trust their impulses and have a drive to 
action. The Artisans learning style is often concrete, random, 
and experiential. Artisans enjoy hands-on, applied learning 
with a fast pace and freedom to explore. They tend to be 
gifted at employing the available means to accomplish an 
end. Their creativity is revealed by the variety of solutions 
they come up with. They are talented at using tools, whether 
their tools be language, frameworks, paintbrush, or hammer. 
Artisans tune into immediate sensory information and vary 
their actions according to the needs of the moment. They are 
gifted at tactics. They can read the situation at hand, instantly 
make decisions, and, if needed, take actions to achieve the 
desired outcome. Table 4.22 summarizes relevant research 
results for the SP temperament. 

It is interesting to speculate about what might contribute 
to the overrepresentation of SP types among male hyperten- 
sives while there is no similar result for the SJ temperament. 
Perhaps the most likely influence is revealed in the research 
results listed in the area of education. We saw in Table 4.21 
that SJ types are at an educational disadvantage because of 


Understanding the 16 Types Ól 








Table 4.22 Research Describing SP Temperament 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


mee ee Oe 


Education 


Tended to be right brain dominant in a study of brain dominance among technical institute learners 


Overrepresented among male hypertensive patients! 


Endorsed none of the strategies that correlate highly with GPA and endorsed five strategies negatively 
correlated with GPA, among high school students responding to the Coping Strategies Inventory? 


Had lower GPA than students of the three other temperaments 


2 


Ranked last among chemical engineering students ranked from highest to lowest order of passing by 


temperaments? 


Overrepresented among least decided in a study of career decisiveness among undergraduates in 


education? 


Higher percentage of undergraduates failed the Texas Academic Program Test than any other combination? 


Notably missing among teachers at all levels of education 


2 


Overrepresented among Academic Decathlon participants compared with their proportion among 


National Merit Finalists? 


Overrepresented among Hawaiian students of language at the University of Hawaii 


abut o DIL I m IS um Dom m mL m 


Careers 


Had lowest job satisfaction among vocational agricultural teachers? 


fett iine m eA ttt qi Y EE 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


More frequent among African American students? 


4 


lob satisfaction higher when facets of jobs were theoretically related to their SP style? 


SS ee eee 


Maintained high interest throughout a production simulation that required learning 
well-defined, structured procedures? 


[BU ee E RECON Y ELLE ee cR eee Fe ee et. ON oo ee ee CO OLEET eee Se EPT GL) 


Source: Shelton, 1996: 2DiTibeno, 1996; ?Hammer, 1996a, "Kirby &amp; Barger, 1990; ^walck. 1996. 


the failure of educational environments to recognize their 
learning styles and competencies. The data for SP types are 
even more dramatic, suggesting that our typical educational 
system is particularly deficient in meeting the educational 
needs, interests, and learning styles of SP types. It would 
seem that the very things that are valued and used as crite- 
ria of educational success are quite opposite to the style and 
areas of competency of people with an SP temperament. As 
noted earlier, performance measures as compared with 
standardized test measures present a clearer picture of SP 
achievement. Chapter 11 discusses issues relevant to SP 
educational performance in some detail. 

The few studies in Table 4.22 addressing careers and 
organizations provide good evidence that when tasks are 
required that are in accord with an SP temperament ap- 
proach, these types report success and satisfaction. 


NF Temperament: Idealist The Idealists core needs are for 
the meaning and significance that come from having a sense 
of purpose and working toward some greater good. Idealists 
need to have a unique identity. They value unity, self- 
actualization, and authenticity. Idealists prefer cooperative 
interactions with a focus on ethics and morality. They tend to 
trust their intuitions and impressions first and then seek to 
find the logic and the data to support them. Given their need 
for empathic relationships, they learn more easily when they 
can relate to the instructor and the group. Idealists tend to be 
gifted at unifying diverse people and helping individuals 
realize their potential. They build bridges between people 


through empathy and clarification of deeper issues. They use 
these same skills to help people work through difficulties. 
Thus they can make excellent mediators, helping people and 
companies solve conflicts through mutual cooperation. If 
working on a global level, Idealists will be championing a 
cause. If working on an individual level, they focus on growth 
and development of the person. Table +.23 summarizes 
relevant research results for the NF temperament. 

Results in the area of personality and related areas are 
consistent with expectations of those with an NF tempera- 
ment, both in their preferences as psychotherapists and 
interests in being counseled. People with this temperament 
may deal with stress psychologically rather than through 
physical reactions, as suggested by their underrepresenta- 
tion in chronic pain and bypass surgery groups. 

In contrast to the SJ and SP temperaments, the NF tem- 
perament appears to be more consistent with the teaching and 
assessment methods of our educational system, and the results 
in Table +.23 make sense for those with an NF approach. 

The results shown for the career and organizational areas 
are also in accord with the NF focus on people and their rel- 
ative disinterest in the technical aspects of their work. Per- 
haps the results relating to satisfaction and dissatisfaction at 
work are influenced by the apparent idealism of people 
with this temperament. 


NT Temperament: Rational The Rationals core needs are 
for mastery of concepts, knowledge, and competence. 
Rationals want to understand the operating principles of the 


6 


2 Theory 


Table 4.23 Research Describing NF Temperament 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 


Predominate among providers of psychological services 


Overrepresented among client-centered psychologists! 


Underrepresented among behavioral psychologists! 


Overrepresented among students seeking counseling! 


Underrepresented among both male and female chronic pain patients 


2 


Females tended to be married much longer in comparison with female NTs! 


Underrepresented among men who had undergone coronary bypass surgery? 


tte te Dt ——— Lm. 


Tended to be right brain dominant in a study of brain dominance among technical institute learners 


——— MÁÓ—M ali, &amp; &lt;- P T a =e 


3 





Ranked second among chemical engineering students ranked from highest to lowest order of passing 


As teachers, endorsed an internal system of belief about discipline for children (children develop from 


As middle school students, performed better than ST types on a series of academic aptitude tests? 


Reported reading more books than any other combination 


3 


Among Japanese students, were overrepresented among foreign language students at the University of 


Ranked second out of four in passing among chemical engineering students? 


Health, Stress, Coping 

Education 
by temperaments? 
an unfolding of potential)? 
Hawaii‘ 

Careers 


~ ————————————— 


M a À—' POS 





Job satisfaction was especially high when facets of jobs were theoretically related to their NF style? 


Reported less job satisfaction with occupational specialty than other types? 


Had higher perceptions of the expected utility of possible alternate jobs than SFs in a study of "intent 


to leave current job"? 
Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


Had weakest preference for tabular reports in a study of information use 


m. -——— — «t Pirna RUPEE Da 


Believe information on people is more important than other information 


Least satisfied information users 


AA t t t ei m ta om mum m Hm m f m ee A m men amare tn meri or hall I i Im m iy Pl 7 Ru a Ee D e Dl a HT I TILES 0a E Mp me 


6 


6 


More likely to use group- and people-oriented techniques to promote change? 


Rely on anecdotes, catchy symbols, vivid imagery to make points? 


Use personal evaluations of situations to reduce uncertainty? 


May ignore statistical evidence and overestimate their ability to work through plans or implement them" 


Took an intermediate position of nominal risk taking; more likely to take risk when in environment 


incompatible with own type, in a study of risk tolerance 


6 


Lost interest rapidly and "dropped out" in a production simulation that required learning well-defined, 


structured procedures? 


Ranked third of four in simulated attempt to achieve lowest production costs 


Source l Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; 2 helton, 1996; ÓDiTiberio, 1996: tKirby &amp; Barger. 1996; ?Hammer, 19964; Owl k, 1996, T Haley, 1997. 


universe and to learn or even develop theories lor everything. 
They value expertise, logical consistency, concepts, and ideas, 
and they seek progress. Rationals tend toward pragmatic, 
utilitarian actions with a technology focus. They trust logic 
above all else, tend to be skeptical, and highly valuc 
precision in language. Their learning style is conceptual, and 
Rationals want to know the underlying principles that 
generate the details and facts rather than the details alone. 
Rationals prefer using their gifts of strategic analysis to 
approach all situations. They constantly examine the 
relationship of the means to the overall vision and goal. No 
strangers to complexity, theories, and models, they like to 
think of all possible contingencies and develop multiple 
plans for handling them. They abstractly analyze a situation 


and consider previously unthought-of possibilities. Re- 
search, analysis, searching for patterns, and developing 
hypotheses arc quite likely to be their natural modi op- 
crandi. Table 4.24 summarizes relevant research results lor 
the NT temperament. 

Those with an NT temperament seem somewhat similar 
in their likely way of dealing with stress to those with an NF 
temperament, in being underrepresented in substance 
abuse, hypertensive, and chronic pain groups. Perhaps 
some other coping strategy than a psychological one may 
be used by pcople with this temperament. Chapter 10 pro- 
vides some insights in this regard. 

The educational system seems even more favorable for 
this temperament than for the NF group, as would be 


Understanding the 16 Types 63 


Table 4.24 Research Describing NT Temperament 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 


Health, Stress, Coping for affective approaches! 


Overrepresented among students preferring cognitive approaches to psychotherapy; underrepresented 


Females tended to have much shorter marriages than female NFs! 


Underrepresented among male substance abusers! 


Males underrepresented among hypertensive patients 


2 


Overrepresented among those having Type A behavior? 


9p T EMCM n EC A XUL ore ee 


t — —— — 


Education 
by temperaments? 


Underrepresented among both male and female chronic pain patients 


2 





=o 


Ranked highest among chemical engineering students ranked from highest to lowest order of passing 


Endorsed an internal system (children develop from an unfolding of potential) in a study of teachers’ 


beliefs about discipline3 


As writing instructors, gave higher grades to students of same type? 


Obtained higher geometry achievement scores among rural high school students? 


Reported reading third highest number of books per year? 


Overrepresented among top 100 executive educators 








— &lt;—— ——— M eee = = - 


ect atte t ae 


Careers 


Ranked highest among chemical engineering students in passing curriculum? 


3 











—— = ——— —— mS mi 


Job satisfaction higher when facets of jobs were theoretically related to their NT style? 


Less satisfied with career among secondary marketing education teachers 4 


Syn eg p EAS) Rem m im p mam on! a= 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


Overrepresented among secretaries stating they disliked their work? 


As managers, see patterns in structured data, ignore cases that negate their beliefs, may resort to quick, 
superficial studies; may persevere in beliefs despite contradictory evidence 


5 


Tend to use survey feedback to promote organizational change® 


Sought more quantitative data than NFs in solving unstructured case study® 


Found information about organizational structure important in study of information content? 


Took an intermediate position of nominal risk taking; more likely to take risk when operating in an 


environment incompatible with their type, in a study of risk tolerance 


6 


Lost interest rapidly and "dropped out” in a production simulation that required learning well-defined, 


structured procedures 


Most strongly favored open climates and rejected closed climates, in a study of type and organizational 


climate 


Ranked last in lowering costs in a computer simulation where goal was to achieve the lowest cost of 


production 


Source 'Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; 2Shelton, 1996; ?DiTiberio, 1996; Hammer, 19962; ?Haley. 1997; °Walck, 1996. 


expected given their interests and kinds of competencies. 
Both high and low interest areas are revealed in the career 
and organization results listed in Table 4.24. For example, 
NTs lost interest in or performed poorly on tasks that 
required a focus on attending to details in a structured way 
and in closed rather than open climates. 


Characteristics of the 16 Types 


Being familiar with the type table and knowing the character- 
istics of combinations of type preferences and dynamic com- 
monalities are valuable ways of acquiring understanding of 
the individual differences that are identified through psycho- 
logical type. However, the unique contribution the MBTI 


makes to our understanding of personality is through 
knowledge of the 16 types as complex, dynamic systems. 
Focusing on whole types enables us to recognize them as 
broad, complex structures that interact dynamically and 
develop over the life span. This final section covers the fol- 
lowing areas: 


B Asummary of the dynamics of each type 

B A type description (identical to the one presented in the 
current edition of Introduction to Type) for each type 

B A summary of research that describes the distinctive 
characteristics of the type 


Table 4.25 is a helpful introduction and overview of the 
16 types. It presents the brief descriptions of the types that 
appear in Introduction to Type (Mycrs, with Kirby &amp; Myers, 
1998). 


64 Theory 








Table 4.25 Characteristics Frequently Associated with Each Type 


Sensing Types Intuitive Types 













































IST) ISFJ INF} INTJ 









Quiet, serious, earn success Quiet, friendly, responsible, Seek meaning and connection | Have original minds and great 
by thoroughness and and conscientious. Commit- in ideas, relationships, and drive for implementing their 
dependability. Practical, ted and steady in meeting material possessions. Want ideas and achieving their 







matter-of-fact, realistic, and their obligations. Thorough, to understand what moti- goals. Quickly see patterns in 
responsible. Decide logically painstaking, and accurate. vates people and are insightful | external events and develop 
what should be done and work | Loyal, considerate, notice and about others. Conscientious long-range explanatory per- 








toward it steadily, regardless of | remember specifics about and committed to their firm spectives. When committed, 
distractions. Take pleasure in people who are important values. Develop a clear vision | organize a job and carry 
making everything orderly to them, concerned with how | about how best to serve the | it through. Skeptical and 


and organized—their work, others feel.Strive to create common good. Organized independent, have high stan- 
























































































































their home, their life. Value an orderly and harmonious and decisive in implementing | dards of competence and 
4 | traditions and loyalty. environment at work and their vision. performance—for them- 
E at home. selves and others. 
o 
Z ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
— | Tolerant and flexible, quiet Quiet, friendly, sensitive, idealistic, loyal to their values | Seek to develop logical 
observers until a problem and kind. Enjoy the present and to people who are impor- | explanations for everything 
appears, then act quickly to moment, what's going on tant to them.Want an exter- | that interests them.Theoreti- 
find workable solutions. around them. Like to have nal life chat is congruent with | cal and abstract, interested 
Analyze what makes things their own space and to their values. Curious, quick more in ideas than in social 
work and readily get through | work within their own time to see possibilities, can be interaction. Quiet, contained, 
large amounts of data to frame. Loyal and committed catalysts for implementing flexible, and adaptable. Have 
isolate the core of practical to their values and to peo- ideas. Seek to understand unusual ability to focus in 
problems. Interested in cause ple who are important to people and to help them ful- | depth to solve problems 
and effect, organize facts them. Dislike disagreements | fill their potential. Adaptable, | in their area of interest. 
using logical principles, value and conflicts, do not force flexible, and accepting unless | Skeptical, sometimes 
, efficiency. their opinions or values on a value is threatened. critical, always analytical. 
others. 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
Flexible and tolerant, they take | Outgoing, friendly, and accept- | Warmly enthusiastic and imag- | Quick, ingenious, stimulat- 
a pragmatic approach focused ing. Exuberant lovers of life, inative. See life as full of possi- | ing, alert, and outspoken. 
on immediate results.Theories | people,and material com- bilities. Make connections Resourceful in solving new 
and conceptual explanations forts. Enjoy working with oth- | between events and informa- and challenging problems. 
| bore them—they want to act ers to make things happen. tion very quickly, and confi- Adept at generating concep- 
, energetically to solve the Bring common sense and a dently proceed based on the tual possibilities and then ana- 
problem. Focus on the here- realistic approach to their patterns they see.Want a lot of | lyzing them strategically. Good 
| and-now, spontaneous, enjoy work, and make work fun. affirmation from others, and at reading other people. Bored 
each moment that they can Flexible and spontaneous, readily give appreciation and by routine, will seldom do the 
be active with others. Enjoy adapt readily to new people support. Spontaneous and same thing the same way, apt 
material comforts and style. and environments. Learn best flexible, often rely on their to turn to one new interest 
z Learn best through doing. by trying a new skill with ability to improvise and their after another. 
9 other people. verbal fluency. 
o 
5 
E EST] ESF} ENF] ENT} 














































Frank, decisive, assume leader- 
ship readily. Quickly see illogi- 
cal and inefficient procedures 
and policies, develop and 
implement comprehensive 
systems to solve organiza- 
tional problems. Enjoy long- 
term planning and goal setting. 
Usually well informed, well 
read, enjoy expanding their 
knowledge and passing it on 
to others. Forceful in present- 
ing their ideas. 


Practical, realistic, matter-of- Warmhearted, conscientious, | VVarm, empathetic, responsive, 
fact. Decisive, quickly move and cooperative. Want har- and responsible. Highly 
to implement decisions. mony in their environment, attuned to the emotions, 
Organize projects and work with determination to needs, and motivations of oth- 
people to get things done, establish it. Like to work with ers. Find potential in everyone, 
focus on getting results in others to complete tasks want to help others fulfill their 
the most efficient way possible. | accurately and on time. Loyal, potential. May act as catalysts 
Take care of routine details. follow through even in small for individual and group 
Have a clear set of logical matters. Notice what others growth. Loyal, responsive to 
standards, systematically need in their day-by-day lives | praise and criticism.Sociable, 
follow them and want others and try to provide it.VVant facilitate others in a group. and 
to also. Forceful in imple- to be appreciated for who provide inspiring leadership. 
menting their plans. they are and for what they 

contribute. 















LE me 20s EUP-IECLITUGNC. rt-—EO4—ODM— Ua WS 
Source From Introduction to Type (6th ed , p. 13), by I B Myers, wth L K Kirhy &amp; K D. Myers, 1998 Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press. Copynght 1998 by 
Consulting Psychologists Press. Used with permission 


The descriptions and research associated with each of 
the 16 types follow. Note that the order of presentation is 
first the eight dominant introverted and extraverted per- 
ceiving types, followed by the eight dominant introverted 
and extraverted judging tvpes. 


IST]: Introverted Sensing 
with Extraverted Thinking 


Dominant function: Sj 
Auxiliary function: Tr 
Tertiary function: Fg 


Fourth/inferior function: Ng 


At Their Best IST]s have a strong sense of responsibility and 
great loyalty to the organizations, families, and relationships 
in their lives. They work with steady energy to fulfill 
commitments as stated and on time. They go to almost any 
trouble to complete something they see as necessary but balk 
at doing anything that doesnt make sense to them. 

ISTJs generally prefer to work alone and be accountable 
for the results; however, they are comfortable working in 
teams when that is necessary to do the job right, when roles 
are clearly defined, and when everyone fulfills assigned 
responsibilities. Competence and responsibility are extremely 
important to ISTJs, who expect others to be as dutiful and 
trustworthy as they require themselves to be. 


Characteristics of ISTJs 1STJs have a profound respect for 
facts. They use their Sensing primarily internally, where 
they have a storehouse of information upon which they 
draw to understand the present. Thus, they are likely to be 


B Practical, sensible, and realistic 
B Systematic 


ISTJs use Thinking in decision making, taking an objec- 
tive, logical, and tough-minded approach. Their focus is on 
the task or system as a whole, rather than on individuals. 
Thus, ISTJs tend to be 


B Logical and analytical 
B Detached and reasonable 


ISTJs are clear and steadfast in their opinions because 
they have arrived at them by carefully and thoroughly 
applving logical criteria based on their experience and 
knowledge. They believe standard procedures exist because 
such procedures work. ISTJs will support change only when 
facts demonstrate such change will bring better results. 


How Others May See Them IST]Js are sociable when 
comfortable in the roles they are playing: however, they 
generally do not share their wealth of rich Sensing 
observations and memories except with close friends. 
Others see their standards and judgments, their desire for 


Understanding the 16 Types 65 


structure and schedules, but they may not see their indi- 
vidual, sometimes humorous, private reactions. 

It can be hard for ISTJs to see the sense in needs that dif- 
fer widely from their own; but, once they are convinced 
that something matters to a person they care about, that 
need becomes a fact. They then go to great lengths to meet 
the need, even while continuing to think it doesn't make 
sense. Others usually see ISTJs as 


B Calm, reserved, and serious 
B Consistent and orderly 
@ Valuing traditions 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ISTJs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Thinking and Sensing preferences. 


B Ifthey have not developed their Thinking, IST)s may not 
have reliable ways of dealing with the world and instead 
may focus solely on their memories and internal data. 

m If they have not developed their Sensing, they may rush 
into premature judgments and actions without consider- 
ing new information. 


If ISTJs do not find a place where they can use their gilts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually feel 
frustrated and may 


B Become rigid about time, schedules, and procedures— 
go “by the book” 

B Be critical and judgmental of others 

B Find it difficult to delegate—to trust anyone else to do 
the job right 


It is natural for ISTJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Intuitive and Feeling parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Not see the wider ramifications of current, expedient 
decisions 

B Concentrate on logic so much they dont consider 
impacts on people 

B Fail to respond appropriately to others’ needs for con- 
nection and intimacy 


Under great stress, ISTJs may be unable to use their cus- 
tomary calm, reasonable judgment and get caught up in 
"catastrophizing"—imagining a host of negative possibili- 
ties for themselves and others. 

Table +.26 summarizes relevant research results for 
ISTJs. The impression one gets from reviewing the health, 
stress, and coping results in Table +.26 is that ISTJs 
respond to life stresses by being overrepresented in sub- 
stance abuse groups, as heart disease and hypertension 
patients, in experiencing chronic pain, and in vulnerability 
to post-traumatic stress disorder, job burnout, and nega- 
tive affeetivity. A similar pattern of stress response is 
shown for the other dominant introverted Sensing types, 


66 Theory 


Table 4.26 Research Describing IST] 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Males among three highest on "Soundness" 


Among three male types overrepresented among substance abusers 


Calm, stable, steady, cautious, conventional! 
Males among three lowest on two out of three measures of creativity? 


3 
4 


Underrepresented among new college students referred for a substance abuse workshop? 


One of four male types most common in a substance abuse program 
One of two most overrepresented female types in a substance abuse program 


4 
4 


Overrepresented among men at risk for heart attack— more than three and one-half times the 
proportion in Myers' high school sample? 


Overrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program? 


Males were overrepresented among hypertensive patients? 


Overrepresented among men with chronic pain—accounted for 38% of sample studied? 


With ISFJs, far outnumber dominant extraverted Sensing types among chronic pain patients? 


Both males and females more frequent among chronic pain patients—with the other three dominant 


Sensing types? 


Overrepresented among males diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder? 


Report highest level of anger and frustration of all the types among those suffering long-term pain? 


Overrepresented among experimental psychologists compared with psychologists in generalt 


In national sample, ranked third highest in "Ever had heart disease or hypertension" 


7 


Ranked fourth highest in “Depersonalization” burnout scale’ 


Ranked fourth highest in “Negative affectivity”’ 


8 


Education Adaptively creative learners 


One of the top two types among industrial/technical teachers® 


Among the four highest types in college GPA® 


Higher on deductive reasoning than dominant Thinking or Feeling types, with other dominant Sensing 


types? 


Among African American college students, most overrepresented of those with a Sensing preference— 
where S preference was generally overrepresented? 


Overrepresented among Hawaiian students in a study comparing language students by ethnic groupings 


at the University of Hawaii !? 


Modal type of Chinese, Filipino, and Japanese language students at the University of Hawaii 
More frequent among African Americans 


10 
10 


Academic subjects preferred: math, practical skills® 


In national sample “Leisure Activities,’ overrepresented in “Watching sporting events,” underrepresented 


in "Listening to music,” “Writing,” and “Appreciating art"? 


the ISFJs, whose auxiliary function is extraverted Feeling 
rather than the ISTJs extraverted Thinking. This discus- 
sion therefore is largely applicable to both dominant intro- 
verted Sensing types. 

What can we conclude from these data and how can 
practitioners capitalize on such awareness to the benefit of 
dominant introverted Sensing types? This is not a minor 
issue, in that ISTJ and ISF] types represent about 25% of the 
U.S. population and similar or even larger percentages of 
the populations of other countries. 

First, it is important to keep results such as these in per- 
spective. The large majority of ISTJs and ISFJs are not in 
substance abuse programs and do not suffer from heart dis- 
ease, hypertension, chronic pain, job burnout, and the like. 


——— 


Nor do we know from these data whether a particular IST] 
is likely to be characterized by any one or more of the “con- 
ditions" cited. What the data suggest is that Introverted 
Sensing types may be particularly likely to respond to stress 
in the ways shown in the research table. We can also rea- 
sonably hypothesize that their stress response has some- 
thing to do with the values, motivations, and styles that 
characterize these types. 

Support for this view comes from an examination of 
the other three research content areas, particularly in 
career and organizational variables. ISTJs appear to be 
attracted to, and probably comfortable in, work environ- 
ments that are efficient, secure, predictable, and conserva- 
tive, and that permit and promote personal responsibility in 


Table 4.26 Research Describing IST) continued 


Careers 


Understanding the 16 Types 67 


Overrepresented among bank officers and financial managers! ! 


In national sample, highest of all types in liking work environments where "Everything is done by the book" 
and one of three highest types in liking “Toeing the line”; lowest of all types in liking work environments 
with "People with different backgrounds"? 


In national sample "Organizational Values,” placed low value on "Visible autonomy,” high value on “Financial 


security”! ? 


In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions” in their job!? 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with nationa! sample!? 


Overrepresented among both male and female small business owners compared with national sample!? 





ao Tc. ect "ve TA" ne V" Deb 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


Occupational trends identified: management, administration, law enforcement, accounting! 


Peat Cu 9 


— E —— pip mdai a - Dire af Ft) — es 


Higher on CPI scales So, Sc, Cm, Fm; lower on Do, Cs, Sy, Sp, Wb, To, Ai, le, Py, Fx, In, Em? 
Higher on Leadership scales (LSI):*Guarded;" “Pressuring”!4 


Departures from SYMLOG Most Effective Profile: underemphasized “Active teamwork toward common goals,” 


yeaa 


"Efficiency, strong impartial management,’ “Popularity and social success,” “Having a good time,” “Friendship,” 
“Trust in the goodness of others”; overemphasized "Self-protection, self-interest first,’ "Conservative and 
correct ways of doing things" (more than any other type),"Obedience" (more than any other type)!’ 


Rated more negatively after feedback on all leadership items (even though initially rated more positively 
than most other types) in Naval Academy leadership behavior study where type training was followed 
by feedback from lower-ranked students 





. Note: !Raters were naive to type when making their ratings; The names of the scales abbreviated in Tables 4.26—4.41 are as follows (bnef definitions of these 
CPt scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations"): Do = Dominance; Cs = Capacity for Status; Sy = Sociability; Sp = Social Presence; 
Sa = Self-Acceptance; In = Independence; Em = Empathy; Re = Responsibility; So = Socialization, Sc = Self-Control, Gi = Good Impression; Cm = Communálity; 
Wb = Well-Being, To = Tolerance; Ac = Achievement via Conformance; Ai = Achievement via Independence; le = Intellectual Efficiency; Py = Psychological- 
Mindedness; Fx = Flexibility; F/M = Feminmity/Masculinny; !*Tables +.26—4.41 report ratings by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower 


on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source: lsnmmary of sahent Adjective Check List (ACL) data and Q-Sort descnpuons of 12 of the 16 types. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, ^Highest three and lowest three types on three 
measnres of creativity, calcnlated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gongh, 1991, “Highest three and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment (“Sonnd- 
ness" and “Efficacy”), which were calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gongh, 1991, *Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ?Shelton. 1996; Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, ‘See 
Chapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy"; "See Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education"; ?DiTibeno, 1996, Oy ir &amp; Barger, 1996; l hammer, 19963; "^ see 


Chapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling”: 


A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the California Psychological Inventory (CPV) using a sample 
ol 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997, 


Results in the same study at the Center for Creauve Leader- 


ship on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSD; ^?A study using SYMLOG (Systemanc Multiple-Level Observation of Groups) analysis of 529 subjects from the top three tiers of manage- 
ment. Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 16 types were averaged across all raters. Sundstrom &amp; Busby, 1997; ^walck, 1996 


their work lives. The patterns of high and low scores on the 
California Psychological Inventory" (CPU) scales are also 
consistent with these qualities. However, a review of Chap- 
ter 13 suggests that stability and personal control in the 
workplace are increasingly rare. The qualities that are val- 
ued, such as teamwork, rapid adaptability to change, flexi- 
bility, and the like, are not typically comfortable and natural 
parts of the ISTJ personality. Dominant introverted Sensing 
types therefore are particularly vulnerable to experiencing 
much of their daily life as quite stressful. Even in the per- 
sonal arena, current trends toward rapid change, geographic 
mobility, alternative lifeStyles, and political and social 
change may be especially incompatible with the role of 
Introverted Sensing types as promoters of the continuity 
and stability of important societal institutions and values. 
An understanding of the distinctive style and motivations 
ol Introverted Sensing types can help practitioners in all 
application areas create effective preventions and interven- 
tions both in the workplace and in the personal lives of these 
types. It is also important to recognize that the other 14 types 
may be particularly vulnerable to different type-consistent 


stresses and responses to stress that are less obvious in the 
particular research studies that have been surveyed. 


ISFJ: Introverted Sensing 
with Extraverted Feeling 


Dominant function: S 
Auxiliary function: Fg 
Tertiary function: Ty 


Fourth/inferior function: Ng 


At Their Best People with ISFJ preferences are dependable 
and considerate, committed to the people and groups with 
which they are associated, and faithful in carrying out 
responsibilities. They work with steady energy to complete 
jobs fully and on time. They will go to great trouble to do 
something they see as necessary but dislike being required 
to do anything that doesn't make sense to them. 

ISFJs focus on what people need and want, and they 
establish orderly procedures to be sure those needs and 


68 Theory 





wants are fulfilled. They take roles and responsibilities seri- 
ously and want others to do the same. 


Characteristics of ISFJs ISFJs have a realistic and practical 
respect for facts. They use their Sensing primarily internally, 
where they have a wcalth of stored information. They 
remember clearly the details of thiugs that have personal 
meaning for them, such as tones of voice or facial ex- 
pression. Thus, ISFJs are likely to be 


w Practical and realistic 
@ Concrete and specific 


ISFJs use Feeling to make decisions based on personal val- 
ues and concern for others. They value harmony and cooper- 
ation and work to create them. Thus, they are likely to be 


m Cooperative and thoughtful of others 
m Kind and sensitive 


Their opinions are firm because their decisions are based 
on careful application of their clear values and their wealth 
of stored data. ISFJs respect established procedures and 
authority, believing that these have persisted because they 
function well. Therefore they will support change only 
when new data show it will be of practical benefit to people. 


How Others May See Them ISFJs are unassuming and 
quiet in their interactions, often putting the needs of others— 
especially family members—ahead of their own. They are 
uncomfortable with confrontation and will go a long way to 
accommodate others, though their respect for traditions and 
peoples feelings can lead them to challenge actions they 
perceive as hurtful or insensitive. People see their values, their 
desire for structure and closure, their kindness. What others 
may not see is the wealth of rich, accurate internal Sensing 
impressions and memories. Others usually sec ISFJs as 


@ Quiet, serious, and conscientious 
m Considerate, good caretakers 
B Honoring commitments, preserving traditions 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ISFJs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Feeling and Sensing preferences. 


m if they have not devcloped their Feeling, ISEJs may not 
have reliable ways of dealing with the world and instead 
focus solely on their Sensing memories and impressions. 

m If they have not developed their Sensing, they may rush 
into value judgments or taking care of others without 
considering the realities. 


IF ISFJs do not find a place where they can use their gifts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually feel 
frustrated and may 


@ Become rigid in supporting hierarchy, authority, and 
procedures 

B Feel unappreciated, resentful—complain a lot 

m Be overly focused on immediate impacts of decisions 





lt is natural for ISFJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Intuitive and Thinking parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Not see the wider ramifications of current decisions or 
procedures 

i Find it difficult to assert their needs 

© Be uncomfortable applying impersonal criteria to deci- 
sions, even when needed 


Under great stress, ISFJs can get caught up in “catastro- 
phizing"—imagining a host of negative possibilities. They 
may then express these without their usual consideration 
for the impact on people around them. 

Table 4.27 summarizes relevant research results for 
ISFJs. Most of the preceding discussion for ISTJs is applica- 
ble to ISFJs,who share dominant introverted Sensing with 
the ISTJs. Notable differences between ISF] and ISTJ data 
are that ISFJs report low levels of assertiveness and are 
highest in reporting stress associated with health, caring for 
parents, and balancing home and work, as well as being 
fourth highest in believing in a higher spiritual power. 

The results in the areas of education, careers, and organi- 
zations further pinpoint both the similarities and the differ- 
ences of ISFJs and ISTJs. ISFJs’ valuing of stability, loyalty, 
and structure, and their educational preferences and skills, 
are consistent with their ISF] nature. Their focus on har- 
mony, helping others, responsibility, and perseverance makes 
them particularly vulnerable to stress associated with the 
rapidly changing workplace, social institutions, and family 
structure. Their pattern on CPI scales supports their ISFJ 
approach to life. 


ESTP: Extraverted Sensing 
with Introverted Thinking 


Dominant function: Sr 
Auxiliary function: T; 
Tertiary function: F, 


Fourth/inferior function: Nj 


At Their Best People with ESTP preferences arc energetic, 
active problem solvers, responding creatively to challenging 
situations in their environment. They seldom let rules or 
standard procedures interfere, finding new ways to usc 
existing systems. They develop easy methods to do difficult 
things and make their work fun. They are flexible, 
adaptable, inventive, and resourcelul, can pull conflicting 
factions together, and are good team members. 

They are popular companions for activities (partics, 
sports, or work) because of their zest for life and their 
enjoyment of the moment. 


Characteristics of ESTPs ESTPs are interested in 
everything going on around them—activities, food, clothes, 
people, the outdoors, and everything that offers new 
experiences. Because they learn more from doing than from 


Understanding the 16 Types 69 


Table 4.27 Research Describing ISFJ 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


£A. Je S teet 


Education 


————— e 


Careers 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


Trend toward overrepresentation among men married more than two times! 

One of four most common types among males in a substance abuse program! 

Overrepresented among females in a substance abuse program! 

Among substance abusers, are attracted to heroin! 

Overrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program! 

Predominant type among men who had undergone coronary bypass surgery? 

Overrepresented among female coronary heart disease patients and second most frequent type? 
With IST]s, far outnumber dominant extraverted Sensing types with chronic pain? 

More frequent among both male and female chronic pain patients? 

One of the four types in college reporting the lowest levels of assertiveness? 


In national sample, highest in reporting stress associated with “Health,” "Caring for aging parents,” and 
"Balancing home and work”? 


In national sample, ranked third fhighest in "Ever had heart disease or hypertension? 

In national sample, ranked fourth highest in "Believing in a higher spiritual power"? 

Ranked second highest on both "Emotional exhaustion" and "Depersonalization" burnout scales 3 
Ranked third highest in "Negative affectivity'? 


Males among three lowest on one out of three measures of creativity; females among three lowest on 
two out of three measures of creativity? 


Second most frequent type among education majors? 

As teachers, prefer a basal approach to reading instruction? 

Rated by psychologists as one of two types least likely to have trouble in school? 

Rated by faculty as skilled in working with dental patients? 

Higher on deductive reasoning than dominant Thinking or Feeling types, with other dominant Sensing types? 
Academic subjects preferred: practical skills? 


In national sample "Leisure Activities,” overrepresented in "Watching TV three hours or more per day,” 
underrepresented in "Playing with computer/video games,” "Watching sporting events,” “Appreciating art.” 
and “Playing sports"? 


Most important features of an ideal job: stable and secure future? 


Highest of all types in national sample in liking work environment characteristic "Employee loyalty &amp; job security”; 
one of three highest types in national sample in liking work environment characteristics "Clear structures" and 
"No expectation for working extra hours"; lowest of all types in liking work environments with "International 
opportunities"? 

In national sample, among three types with lowest income? 

In national sample "Organizational Values,” place high value on “Happy family" and low value on "Variety &amp; 
challenge" and" Visible autonomy"? 

In national sample, among top four types in valuing "Health" and "Spirituality"? 

In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions,” “Stress,” and "Salary" in their jobs? 

Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample? 

Overrepresented among male small business owners compared with national sample? 


Occupational trends identified: education, health care, religious settings? 


Higher on CPI scales Sc, Fm; lower on Do, Ai, Cs, le, Sy, Py, Sp, Fx, Sa, In, Wb, Em, To! 
Higher on LSI scales Conservative, Conventional, Guarded, Reserved! ! 


Modal type in the organization in study comparing type with internal performance ratings— but ratings 
were negatively correlated with performance 


Showed change on at least four of seven leadership items in Naval Academy leadership behavior study 
where type training was followed by feedback from lower-ranked students? 


Note: Brief defimtions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, "Uses of Type in Orgamzations. See also Table 4 26; !! Tables 4+.26-4.41 report 
ratings by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source Í Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996, “Shelton, 1996, *See € hapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”, i highest three and lowest three types on three measures of 
creativity, calculated separately for males and females Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, ?See Chapter 11, "Uses of Type in Education, PDiTiberio, 1996; ‘Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985: 

Hammer. 1996a: See c hapter 12. “Uses of Type in Career Counseling” Is study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the seales of the CPI using a sample of 
15.102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creauve Leadership Fleenor, 1997; © “Results in the same study at the Center for Creauve 
Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSD; ^Walck, 1996 


70 Theory 


studving or reading, they tend to plunge into things, 
learning as they go, trusting their ability to respond rc- 
sourcefully. ESTPs are likely to be 


B Observant 
B Practical and realistic : 
B Active, involved in immediate experience 


ESTPs make decisions by logical analysis and reasoning 
and can be tough when the situation calls for toughness. 
They usually are 


Bm Analytical, rational problem solvers 
B Straightforward and assertive 


ESTPs are expert at seeing the needs of the moment and 
reacting quickly to meet them. For the most part, they pre- 
fer to deal flexibly with what is, rather than make judg- 
ments. They good-naturedly take things as they are and 
seek satisfying solutions, rather than impose a “should” or 
"must" of their own. 


How Others May See Them ESTPs are strong in the art 
of living. They love life and immerse themselves in it; others 
respond to their enthusiasm and good humor. ESTPs are 
people of action. They usually dislike and avoid theory and 
written directions. Traditional schools can be difficult for 
people with these preferences, though ESTPs do well when 
they see the relevance and are allowed to experiment. 
Others usually see ESTPs as 


B Gregarious, fun-loving, and spontaneous 
B Adventurous risk takers 
B Pragmatic troubleshooters 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ESTPs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Thinking and Sensing preferences. 


B If they have not developed their Thinking, ESTPs will 
not have a useful way of selecting amongst the barrage of 
incoming sensory data. They may then have difficulty 
setting priorities or may make ill-founded decisions. 

B Ii they have not developed their Sensing, they may focus 
on the Sensing data that are immediately available. Their 
decisions may then be limited to gratification of their 
sensual desires, particularly those involving physical 
challenge and risk. 


If ESTPs do not find a place where they can use their 
gifts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually 
feel frustrated and may 


B Have trouble accepting structure and meeting deadlines 
B locus entirely on excitement and activity, getting caught 
up in external activities 
@ Put enjoying life ahead of important obligations 
[t is natural for ESTPs to give less attention to their non- 


preferred Intuitive and Feeling parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they 


@ May not see the wider ramifications of their actions and 
decisions 

m May forget dates and events that have special meaning to 
others 

B May be unaware of the impact of their actions on others 

B May be impatient with discussion or exploration of 
tclationships 


Under great stress, ESTPs may have negative fantasies. 
They may imagine that others do not really care about 
them, then marshal and distort their Sensing data to pro- 
vide themselves with “evidence” of this neglect. 

Table +.28 summarizes relevant research results for ESTPs. 
Some of the possible consequences of extraverting rather 
than introverting one’s dominant Sensing function can be 
inferred from a review of Table 4.28. ESTPs are rated lower by 
observers on some measures assumed to reflect psychological 
adaptation, and in comparison with ISTJs they are less likely 
to be common in substance abuse and cardiac groups. How- 
ever, they are frequent in chronic pain groups, like the ISTJs. 
They seem less subject to the kind of job burnout effects that 
characterize the dominant Introverted Sensing types, are 
highest of the types in positive affect, and report satisfaction 
with their intimate relationships. Note that this type is identi- 
fied by colleges as candidates for substance abuse training, 
but in fact ESTPs are less likely to appear in substance abuse 
treatment programs. Other variables in this content area that 
do not show up for Introverted Sensing types seem consistent 
with an ESTP approach to life. 

Although the gender difference in measures of creativity 
is puzzling, the remaining educational results are consistent 
with expectations for a type whose learning style needs and 
expression of competence are addressed poorly by our edu- 
cational system. Note, however, that some of their educa- 
tional strengths are also indicated. Once in college they 
tend to remain, perhaps because the broader spectrum of 
subjects and training methods permits them to meet their 
educational needs. Chapter 11 discusses educational issues 
of ESTP and ESFP types in some detail. 

The career and organization areas highlight some of the . 
ways ESTPs function in the world of work. They are attracted 
to type-consistent fields such as marketing and technology, 
and their confidence and comfort in interacting with the 
environment are shown in their higher standing on the CPI 
scales of Dominance, Sociability, Social Presence, and the 
like. In contrast, they may be judged somewhat negatively 
for their just as type-consistent lower scores on Responsibil- 
ity, Self-Control, Tolerance, and other scales. 

Some of the characteristics that come naturally and com- 
fortably to ESTPs and their companion dominant extra- 
verted Sensing type, the ESFPs, are well regarded by society, 
while others can be interpreted as showing immaturity, lack 
of responsibility, and a lack of seriousness about goals and 
accomplishments. Much of the data above suggest such soci- 
etal biases and the ways in which dominant extraverted 
Sensing types are likely to be misunderstood and misjudged, 
particularly as students and in the workplace. 


Undersianding the 16 Types 71 











Table 4.28 Research Describing ESTP 
Personality, Psychotherapy, Males among three lowest on "Efficacy"; females among three lowest on'"Soundness" 
Health, Stress, Coping and "Efficacy"! 
Frequent among college students referred for substance abuse training? 
One of three least common types among males in a substance abuse program? 
Underrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program? 


More frequent among both male and female chronic pain patients? 


Less frequent than dominant introverted Sensing types among female chronic pain patients? 
With ISTPs, at highest risk for setbacks due to overdoing among those with long-term pain? 


Ranked ISth out of 16 types on using spiritual/philosophical coping resources and l6th out of 16 types on 
using Cognitive coping resources 


One of the four types in college reporting highest levels of assertiveness? 

Ranked third lowest in "Emotional exhaustion” and "Depersonalization" burnout scales? 
Ranked highest in "Positive affectivity"" 

In national sample, ranked fourth highest in satisfaction with "Marriage/intimate relationship”? 


PE eR my ter om rut e&gt;- = entem re ee 





Education Males among three lowest on two out of three measures of creativity; females among three highest on 
one out of three measures of creativity? 


Collaborative learners and field dependent learnersó 


One of two types with lowest overall GPA® 


Among the highest in college retention 


With other dominant Sensing types, higher on deductive reasoning than dominant Thinking or Feeling 
types’ 
With ISTPs, the modal types of language students at the University of Hawaii® 


More frequent among African American high school males compared with Howard University males® 
Academic subjects preferred: history, math, practical skills? 
In national sample “Leisure Activities,” overrepresented in "Playing sports" 


ee U queen » d mte tt m m mmm mmm mm 


rae 


Careers Three top work characteristics favored in national sample: "Variety of tasks,” "Independence &amp; 
achievement,” "Clear structure"? 


In national sample, among types most dissatisfied with company/organization worked for? 


In national sample “Organizational Values,” place high value on “Visible autonomy" and low value on 
"Achievement within system" and “Financial analysis”? 


In national sample, among top four types in valuing "Prestige"? 
P P p £ 


29 66 


In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions,” "Opportunity to contribute to society,’ and "Amount 
9 
of stress 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample? 
Occupational trends identified: marketing, skilled trades, business, law enforcement, applied technology” 


Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scales Do, Sy, Sp, Sa, Fx; lower on Re, Sc, To, Ac, Ai, le, Py, Fm!0 
Management, Teams Higher on LSI scale Demanding! 


Departures from Most Effective Profile: underemphasize "Active teamwork toward a common goal," 


"Efficiency, strong impartial management,” “Equality,” "Responsible idealism and collaborative work"; 


overemphasize “Self-protection, self-interest first"? 
en CVV ee NUN ot ee T EC DP" HR MCENKEULAENC  IOGE TON QUIIL— ÉL a a O TULULTIINERFTULULNCUELTOLDEKDCTLCICEECTIO 0 74-0007 duum Ci Eee eae 


: EM "PC &gt; : . 
Note: !'Bnef definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; !?Tables 4.26—4.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source: ! Highest three and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment ("Soundness" and *Efficacy"), which were calculated separately for males and females. 
Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; ^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; "Shelton, 1996; *See Chapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”; ?Highest three and lowest three 
lypes on three measures of creativity, calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; See Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education”; ‘DiTibeno, 1996; 

Kirby &amp; Barger. 1996; “See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling"; ^ A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample 
of 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997, I Results in the same study at the Center for Creative 
Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSI), ^A study using SYMLOG analysis of 529 subjects from the top three tiers of management. Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 
16 types were averaged across all raters. Sundstrom &amp; Busby, 1997. 


12 Theory 








ESFP: Extraverted Sensing 
with Introverted Feeling 


Dominant function: Sr 
Auxiliary function: F, 
Tertiary function: Tj 


Fourth/inferior function: Nj 


At Their Best People with ESFP preferences are exuberant 
lovers of life. They live in the moment and find enjoyment in 
people, food, clothes, animals, the natural world, and 
activities. They seldom let rules interfere with their lives, 
focusing on meeting human needs in creative ways. 

ESFPs are excellent team players, oriented to getting the 
task done with a maximum amount of fun and a minimum 
amount of fuss. 


Characteristics of ESFPs ESFPs are interested in people 
and new experiences. Because they learn more from doing 
than from studying or reading, they tend to plunge into 
things, learning as they go. They appreciate their possessions 
and take pleasure in them. ESFPs are likely to be 


B Observant 
B Practical, realistic, and specific 
B Active, involved in immediate experiences 


ESFPs make decisions by using their personal values. 
They use their Feeling judgment internally to make deci- 
sions by identifying and empathizing with others. They are 
good at interpersonal interactions and often play the role of 
peacemaker. Thus, ESFPs are likely to be 


B Generous, optimistic, and persuasive 
m Warm, sympathetic, and tactful 


ESFPs are keen observers of human behavior. They seem 
to sense what is happening with other people and respond 
quickly to their practical needs. They are especially good at 
mobilizing people to deal with crises. 


How Others May See Them ESFPs get a lot of fun out 
of life and are fun to be with; their exuberance and en- 
thusiasm draw others to them. They are flexible, adapt- 
able, congenial, and easygoing. They seldom plan ahead, 
trusting their ability to respond in the moment and deal 
effectively with whatever presents itself. They hate struc- 
ture and routine and will generally find ways to get around 
them. 

ESFPs tend to learn by doing, by interacting with their 
environment. They dislike theory and written explanations. 
Traditional schools can be difficult for ESFPs, though they 
do well when they see the relevance and are allowed to 
interact with people or the topics being studied. Others 
usually see ESFPs as 


W Resourceful and supportive 
B Gregarious, fun-loving, playful, spontaneous 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ESFPs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Feeling and Sensing preferences. 


m [f they have not developed their Feeling, ESFPs may get 
caught up in the interactions of the moment, with no 
mechanism for weighing, evaluating, or anchoring 
themselves. 

B If they have not developed their Sensing, they may focus 
on the sensory data available in the moment. Their deci- 
sions may then be limited to gratification of their sensual 
desires, particularly those involving interactions with 
other people. 


If ESFPs do not find a place where they can use their 
gifts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usu- 
ally feel frustrated and may 


m Become distracted and overly impulsive 
B Have trouble accepting and meeting deadlines 
B Overpersonalize others’ actions and decisions 


It is natural for ESFPs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Intuitive and Thinking parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Fail to look at long-term consequences, acting on imme- 
diate needs of themselves and others 

B Avoid complex or ambiguous situations and people 

B Put enjoyment ahead of obligations 


Under great stress, ESFPs may feel overwhelmed inter- 
nally by negative possibilities. They then put energy into 
developing simplistic global explanations for their negative 
pictures. 

Table 4.29 summarizes relevant research for ESFPs. 
Many of the results found for ESTPs apply to ESFPs as 
well, as do the comments that address the results. However, 
there are also some interesting differences that may be due 
to the auxiliary introverted Feeling function of ESFPs in 
contrast to the auxiliary introverted Thinking function of 
the ESTPs. Gender effects may also be inferred, given the 
difference in Thinking and Feeling preference incidences 
for males and females. Thus it is interesting that male 
ESFPs are among the three highest types on one measure of 
psychological adjustment (Efficacy) and female ESFPs are 
among the three lowest, while both male and female ESTPs 
are judged to be low on these adjustment measures. Since 
the Efficacy measure was based on ratings by observers 
who were naive about type theory and the types of their 
subjects, this result reflects the way in which these type- 
gender combinations are perceived in our society. Chapter 
IO explores this issuc. Similarly puzzling type and gender 


Hadeninae the 16 Types 13 


— —— -— —— — m- —————— e c oM 











Table 4.29 Research Describing ESFP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Males among three highest on "Efficacy"; females among three lowest on "Efficacy"! 


Health, Stress, Coping Overrepresented among new college students referred for a substance abuse workshop? 


Overrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program? 


Less frequent than dominant introverted Sensing types among female chronic pain patients? 


With other three dominant Sensing types, more frequent among both male and female chronic pain 
3 
patients 


In national sample, ranked | 5th out of 16 types on using physical coping resources; l6th out of 16 on 
using spiritual/philosophical coping resources; highest ranking coping resource was "Emotional"—3rd of 
the 16 types? 


Ranked second lowest on "Emotional exhaustion" and "Depersonalization" burnout scales* 








In national sample, second highest in satisfaction with’ v Marrraggyntimate relationship" 


M E —— eee €———————————————————— —  — : —— — a ^ -— mni » 


Education Males among three highest on two ok of three measures of creativity; females among three lowest on 
one out of two measures of creativity? 


Dependent learners (little intellectual curiosity, look to authority for guidelines) and field dependent 
learners® 

One of two types with lowest overall college GPA® 

Among the highest in college retention® 
Among highest persisters in college® 


Higher on deductive reasoning than dominant Thinking or Feeling types, with other dominant Sensing 
types’ 
Academic subjects preferred: history® 


In national sample “Leisure Activities,” overrepresented in “Watching TV three or more hours per day’; 
underrepresented in "Reading" and “Working ouvexercising"ó 


Careers Most important features of an ideal job: "A stable and secure future"? 


Highest of all types in national sample in liking work environment characteristics "Making the job as simple 
as possible" and "No expectation for working extra hours" aN 


In national sample, among types with lowest income and likely to leave the job! 


In national sample “Organizational Values,” place high value on "Happy family" and low value on 
"Achievement within system’ !® 


In national sample among top four types valuing “Home/family,” “Health, ” “Friendships,” "Financial security; 
“Spirituality”! 


In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions, ale Security,’ “Stress,” “Salary,” and “Accomplishment” 
and satisfied with "People | work with"! 


Underrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample! 
Underrepresented among both male and female small business owners compared with national sample! 
usc üpatiei shit trends identified: health care, EE Pes MP Eia. worker, skilled trades? 


cu ow — metris e t s 





= pm c 


Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scale Sy; lower on Sc, Ac, ET 


Management, Teams Higher on LSI scales Changeable, Energetic, Forceful, Initiating, Resourceful! 


Showed change on at least four of seven leadership items in Naval Academy leadership behavior study in 
which type training was followed by feedback from lower-ranked students !? 


een ee CORN MM i PS Ee a ee Se ee eS eee 


] n" : A I 
Note: !! Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, "Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; !^Tables 4.26—4 41 report 
range by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source: l Highest three and lowest three types on two measures of personal E Uh ("Soundness" and "Efficacy ), which were c alculated separately for males and females 
Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; “Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; Shelton, 1996; *See C hapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”. ?Highest three and lowest three, types 
on three measures of creativity, calculated separatcly for males and females Thome s Gough, 1991, "See Chi ipter 11, “Uses of Type in Education",  DiTiberio. 1996, BN vers 
&amp; McCaulley, 1985; "Hammer, 1996a, “See Chapter 12, "Uses of Type in Carecr Counseling"; ^ A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of thc 
CPI using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership Fleenor, 1997; “Results in the same study at the 
Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSI); 'S3walck, 1996. 


14 Theory 


results occur for measures of creativity shown in Tables 
3.28 and 4.29. 

ESFPs report watching TV as a frequent leisure activity, 
while ESTPs are overrepresented in playing sports. To what 
extent gender contributes to this remains for further study. 
There are notable differences in career and organizational 
results as well. Like ESTPs, ESFPs are higher on the CPI 
scale Sociability and lower on the Self-Control, Achieve- 
ment via Conformity, and Psychological-Mindedness scales. 
However, the overall results in the career and work areas 
suggest that ESEP career and work values are quite distinct 
from those of ESTPs, in the ESFP focus on stability, security, 
and low job stress, and in the kinds of occupations that 
appeal to those with an ESFP nature. 


INT]: Introverted Intuition 
with Extraverted Thinking 


Dominant function N] 
Auxiliary function: Tg 
Tertiary function: Fr 


Fourth/inferior function: Se 


At Their Best People with INTJ preferences have a clear 
vision of future possibilities coupled with the drive and 
organization to implement their ideas. They love complex 
challenges and readily synthesize complicated theoretical 
and abstract matters. Once they have created their general 
structure, they devise strategies to achieve their goals. Their 
global thinking leads them to develop visionary goals and a 
broad-brush plan for achieving these within large 
organizational structures. 

INTJs value knowledge and expect competence of them- 
selves and others. They especially abhor confusion, mess, 
and inefficieney. | 


Characteristics of INTJS INTJs see things from a global 
perspective and quickly relate new information to overall 


patterns. They trust their insightful connections regardless 
of established authority or popular opinions. Dull routine 
smothers their creativity. INTJs use their Intuition primarily 
internally, where they develop complex structures and 
pictures of the future. They are likely to be 


g insightful, creative synthesizers 
m Conceptual, long-range thinkers 


INTJs use their Thinking to make logical decisions. They 
assess everything with a critical eye, quickly identify prob- 
lems to solve, and arc tough and decisive when the situa- 
tion calls for toughness. INTJs tend to be 


w Clear and concise 
m Rational, detached, and objectively critical 


INTJs are excellent long-range planners and often rise to 
positions of leadership in groups or organizations. They are 


independent, trust their own perceptions and judgments 
more than those of others, and apply their high standards of 
knowledge and competence most rigorously to themselves. 


How Others May See Them INTJs present a calm, 
decisive, and assured faee to the world, though they may 
find it difficult to engage in social conversation. They 
usually don't directly express their most valued and 
valuable part: their creative insights. Instead, they translate 
them into logical decisions, opinions, and plans, which they 
often express clearly. Because of this, others sometimes 
experience INTJs as intractable, much to the surprise of the 
INTJ, who is very willing to change an opinion when new 
evidence emerges. Others usually see INTJs as 


w Private, reserved, hard to know, even aloof 
m Conceptual, original, and independent 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported INTJs in the development and ex- 


pression of their Thinking and Intuitive prefcrences. 


gm If they have not developed their Thinking, INTJs may 
not have reliable ways to translate their valuable insights 
into achievable realities. 

m If they have not developed their Intuition, they may not 
take in enough information or take in only that informa- 
tion that fits their insights. Then they may make ill- 
founded decisions based on limited or idiosyncratic 
information. 


If INTJs do not find a place where they can use their gifts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually fecl 
frustrated and may 


g Become aloof and abrupt, not giving enough informa- 
tion about their internal processing 

w Be critical of those who do not see their vision quickly 

g Become single-minded and unyielding in pursuing it 


It is natural for INTJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Sensing and Feeling parts. If they negleet these 
too much, however, they may 


m Overlook details or faets that do not fit into their Intu- 
itive patterns 

g Engage in "intellectual games,” quibbling over abstract 
issues and terms that have little meaning or relevance to 
others 

m Not give enough weight to the impacts of their decisions 
on individuals 

g Fail to give as much praise or intimate connection as 
others desire 


Under extreme stress, INTJs can overindulge in Sensing 
activitics—watching TV reruns, playing cards, overeating— 
or become overly focused on specific details in their envi- 
ronment that they normally do not notice or usually see as 
unimportant (housecleaning, organizing cupboards). 


Table 4.30 summarizes relevant research results for 
INTJs. Dominant introverted Intuitive types with extra- 
verted Thinking are mostly quite different from the other 
dominant Introverted perceiving type with Thinking, the 
ISTJs. Except for a reported overrepresentation among sub- 
stance abusers, INTJs are underrepresented among cardiac 
and hypertensive groups, report low stress in two arcas, 
and are low in the negative affectivity measure (described in 
Chapter 10). It is interesting that they arc the type reporting 
the highest fear of reinjury of those with long-term pain and 
are also high on two of the three job burnout scales. As 
noted in Chapter 10, INTJs present a complex picture in 
their experience of and response to life stresses. 

The education results in Table 4.30 are quite consistent 
for a type whose interests and abilities are mosily consonant 
with our edacational system and typical measures of intel- 
leciual competence. In a general way, the results for INTJs 
are the mirror image of those for the opposite type, ESFP 
The INTJ focus on competence, achievement, creativity, 
and independence is also evident in the career and organi- 
zation areas. Although INTJs fulfill many of the positive 
expectations and values of society, there are some ways in 
which their qualities may be viewed less positively. They 
ranked lowest in values around home and family and other 
relationship-centered areas, and though high on the CPI 
scales Responsibility and Self-Control, both kinds of 
achievement measures, and Intellectual Efficiency, they 
were lower on scales that concern relating to people— 
Dominance, Sociability, Social Presence, Self-Acceptance, 
Good Impression, and Empathy. They similarly underem- 
phasize (in the Systematic Multiple-Level Observation of 
Groups data) some of the more “social” qualities. 


INF]: Introverted Intuition 
with Extraverted Feeling 


Dominant function: Nj 
Auxiliary function: Fg 
Tertiary function: Tr 


Fourth/inferior function: Sg 


AtTheir Best People with INF] preferences have a gilt for 
intuitively understanding complex meanings and human 
relationships. They have faith in their insights and find that 
they often empathically understand the feelings and 
motivations of people before the others are themselves 
aware of them. They combine this empathic understanding 
with the drive and organization to implement global plans 
for enhancing peoples lives. 

INFJs have a visionary grasp of human relationships and 
possibilities, which, when articulated, can elevate and in- 
spire others. 


Characteristics of INFJs INFJs seek meaning and 
connection in their lives and have little use for details unless 


Understanding the 16 Types 19 


they fit with their inner vision. They use their Intuition 
primarily internally, where they develop complex pictures 
and understandings. INFJs are likely to be 


w Insightful, creative, and visionary 
m Conceptual, symbolic, and metaphorical 
gm Idealistic, complex, and deep 


INFJs apply persona} values and empathize to under- 
stand others and make decisions. They are loyal to people 
and institutions that exemplify their values but have little 
interest in those that do not. INFJs prefer to lead persua- 
sively by sharing their vision. They are likely to be 


B Scnsitive, compassionate, and empathic 
m Deeply committed to their values 


INFJs want meaning and purpose in their work, their 
relationships, even their material possessions. They are 
invested in growth and development for themselves and sig- 
nificant others and are willing to consider unconventional 
paths to achieve these. They value the depth and complexity 
of their insights and creative gifts as well as those of others. 
They want to see these insights realized in the world. 


How Others May See Them  INFJs readily show 
compassion and caring for others, but they share their 
internal intuitions only with those they trust. Because they 
keep this most valued, important part private, others may 
find them difficult to know. When they try to communicate 
their internal sense of “knowing,” they often express ii 
metaphorically and with complexity. They especially value 
authenticity and commitment in relationships. 

Though INFJs are usually reserved, they dont hesitate to 
assert themselves when their values are violated. Then thev 
can be persistent and insistent. Others usually experience 
INF]s as 


m Private, even mysterious 
g Intense and individualistic 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported INFJs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Feeling and Intuitive preferences. 


m If they have not developed their Feeling, INFJs may not 
have reliable ways of making decisions and accomplish- 
ing their goals. Then, their valuable insights and creativ- 
ity stay locked inside. 

m lf they have not developed their Intuition, they may not 
take in enough information or take in only what fits with 
their internal pictures. Then they will make ill-founded 
decisions based on distorted or limited information. 


If INFJs do not find a place where they can use their gifts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually feel 
frustrated and may 


m Not give others the information they used to arrive ata 
decision, and thus seem arbitrary 


16 Theory 


— 





Table 4.30 Research Describing INT] 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Discreet, industrious, logical, deliberate, methodical! 


Health, Stress, Coping Among three male types overrepresented among substance abusers* 


Underrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program? 


Had the highest fear of reinjury of all the types among those suffering long-term pain? 


Highest rank on coping resources used was spiritual/philosophical—ranked third out of the 16 types? 


In national sample, lowest in reporting stress associated with “School” and “Caring for aging parents"? 


In national sample, lowest in "Watching TV" as method of coping with stress* 


In national sample, ranked third lowest in "Ever had heart disease or hypertension" ^ 


In national sample, ranked highest in saying “No” to belief in a higher spiritual power? 


Ranked fourth highest on "Emotional exhaustion" and third highest in "Depersonalization" burnout scales? 
Ranked fourth lowest in “Negative affectivity"^ 


dii e -————— ewes 


Education One of two types with highest undergraduate GPA? 
Among highest persisters in church-related colleges? 
Participant learners (learn course content and like to go to class)? 
Projected self greatest number of years into the future in essays? 
One of two types with highest first semester college GPA? 
One of two types most frequent among RAs at a womens college? 
Highest GPA among persisters in college? 
One of two types most frequent among female student affairs officers? 


^ oe 


In national sample "Leisure Activities,’ overrepresented in “Taking classes, going to school,’ “Appreciating 
ART 


art,’ "Playing with computers or video games,’ “Working out/exercising"; underrepresented in “Watching 
TV three hours or more per day"? 


Higher on deductive reasoning than Feeling types, with other dominant Intuitive types$ 


Academic subjects preferred: science? 


E —————— —— $4 am "Y » = amm. mp vox —-— 


Careers Most important features of an ideal job: creativity and originality? 


One of three highest types in liking work environment characteristic “Variety of tasks" as well as highly 
favoring “Clear structure" and "Independence &amp; achievement”; lowest of all the types in liking work 
environments characterized by "Making the job as simple as possible"? 


In national sample "Organizational Values,” place high value on "Financial analysis" and low value on 
"Business sociability"? 


In national sample, among four types valuing "Achievement"? 


In national sample, among types with highest income; dissatisfied with "Future work opportunities," 
“Promotions,” and “Job security" in their job? 


&gt;) 44 


In national sample, ranked lowest (65.1%) of all types in valuing “Home/family,’ "Financial security" (50.076), 
"Relationships &amp; friendships” (30.8%), and "Community service"? 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample? 
Overrepresented among female small business owners compared with national sample? 
Occupational trends identified: scientific or technical fields, computers, law? 


——— ám — t 


Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scales Re, Sc, Ac, Ai, le, Py, Fm; lower on Do, Sy, Sp, Sa, Gi, Em}? 


Management,Teams Higher on LSI scales Adaptable, Analytical, Appreciative, Deliberate, Determined, Fair, Independent, 
Initiating, Methodical, Organized, Resourceful, Self-Confident, Supportive, Understanding! ! 


Lower than the other TJ types on “Tough-minded, self-oriented assertiveness” !? 


Departures from SYMLOG Most Effective Profile: underemphasize "Active teamwork toward a common 


goal,” "Efficiency, strong impartial management,’ "Popularity and social success" (on which they were also 
significantly lower than ESTJs, ENTPs, and Feeling types),"Protecting less able members,’ "Having a good 


time,” "Friendship"; seen as overemphasizing “Self-procection, self-interest first,’ "Conservative, 
established, correct ways of doing things,” "Obedience" (more than any type except ISTJs) ? 





Note: Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found i Chapter 13, "Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26, !! Tables 4.20-4.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were sigiificantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


source: "summary of salient ACL data and Q-Sort descnptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their ratings. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; ^Ouenk &amp; Quenk, 
1996; Shelton, 1996, *See € hapter 10, "Uses of lype in Counseling and Psychotherapy"; "See Chapter 11, "Uses of Type m Education"; 9DiTiberio, 1996, ^ Myers &amp; McCaulley, 
1985, "Hammer, 19963, "Sec € hapter 12, “Uses of Ivpe in Career Counseling”. VA study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI usimg a sample of 
15.102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center lor Creative Leadership Fleenor, 1997; ^ Results m the same study at the Center for Creative Leader- 
ship on the Leader ship Style Indicator (LSI). ^A study using SYMLOG analysts of 529 subjects from the top three ters of management Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 16 types 
were averaged across all raters Sundstrom &amp; Bushy, 1997 


m Base their judgments on little data, on a sense of “know- 
ing" that has little basis in reality 

gm Withdraw their energy and insight 

m Become resentful and critical 


It is natural for INFJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Sensing and Thinking parts. H they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


m Be unable to verbalize their inner insights in a way that 
others can understand 

m Fail to check their insights against reason and practical- 
ity, and end up following a vision that has little possibil- 
ity of being realized 

m Become single-minded in pursuit of a vision 


Under great stress, INFJs may become obsessed with data 
they normally would consider irrelevant or overindulge in 
Sensing activities such as watching TV reruns, overeating, or 
buying things that have little meaning for them. 

Table 4.31 summarizes relevant research results for 
INFJs. The difference in auxiliary extraverted Feeling 
rather than auxiliary extraverted Thinking yields quite 
striking contrasts in the personality, stresses, values, inter- 
ests, and career- and job-related variables of INF]s. They are 
attracted both to the practice of psychotherapy and to bene- 
fiting from it as clients. In contrast to the INTJs, they report 
the highest stress of all the types in areas associated with 
work, intimate relationships, and school and in arcas desig- 
nated as “other” and report the greatest dissatisfaction with 
their marriage/intimate relationship. 

INFJs are similar to INTJs in being particularly favored 
in the educational sphere, although their leisure activities 
focus on introverted activities that are more artistic, in con- 
trast to the INTJs more “intellectual” pursuits. 

Some insight into the patterns revealed in the personal- 
ity area may be gained by reviewing the research results on 
careers and the work setting. From the values and interests 
shown, as well as from their typological character as highly 
in tune with unconscious communications, one might infer 
that INFJs are quite sensitive to nuances and undercurrents 
ol feeling in many aspects of their lives. As such, situations 
that are not particularly stressful for some other types may 
prove stressful for INFJs. Their dissatisfactions in many 
areas may be partly due to their possibly idealistic criteria 
for satisfaction. INFJ males are among the most oblivious to 
their partners dissatisfaction in an intimate relationship, 
and INFJs in general express dissatisfaction with their inti- 
mate relationships. 


ENTP: Extraverted Intuition 
with Introverted Thinking 


Dominant function: Nr 
Auxiliary function: T, 
Tertiary function: Fi 


Fourth/inlerior function: S; 


Understanding the 16 Types TI 





At Their Best People with ENTP preferences constantly 
scan the environment for opportunities and possibilities. 
They see patterns and connections not obvious to others 
and at times seem able to see into the future. They are adept 
at generating conceptual possibilities and then analyzing 
them strategically. 

ENTPs are good at understanding how systems work 
and are enterprising and resourceful in maneuvering within 
them to achieve their ends. 


Characteristics of ENTPs ENTPs are enthusiastic 
innovators. Their world is full of possibilities, interesting 
concepts, and exciting challenges. They are stimulated by 
difficulties, quickly devising creative responses and 
plunging into activity, trusting their ability to improvise. 
They use their Intuition primarily externally and enjoy 
exercising ingennity in the world. ENTPs are likely to be 


B Creative, imaginative, and clever 
Æ Theoretical, conceptual, and curious 


ENTPs use their Thinking primarily internally to ana- 
lyze situations and their own ideas and to plan. They 
admire competence, intelligence, precision, and efficiency. 
ENTPs are usually 


gm Analytical, logical, rational, and objective 
m Assertive and questioning 


ENTPs are enterprising, resourceful, active, and ener- 
getic. They respond to challenging problems by creating 
complex and global solutions. They are usually adept at 
“reading” other people, seeing how to motivate them, and 
assuming Jeadership. They can do almost anything that 
captures their interest. 


How Others May See Them ENTPs are spontaneous and 
adaptable. They find schedules and standard operating 
procedures confining and work around them whenever 
possible. They are remarkably insightful about the attitudes of 
others, and their enthusiasm and energy can mobilize people 
to support their vision. 

Their conversational style is customarily challenging and 
stimulating because they love to debate ideas. They are flu- 
ent conversationalists, mentally quick, and enjoy verbal 
sparring. When they express their underlying Thinking 
principles, however, they may speak with an intensity and 
abruptness that seem to challenge others. Others usually see 
ENTPs as 


m Independent, autonomous, and creative 
m Lively, enthusiastic, and energetic 
m Assertive and outspoken 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ENTPs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Thinking and Intuitive preferences. 


m If they have not developed their Thinking, they may not 
have reliable ways to evaluate their insights and make 


78 Theory 


Table 4.31 Research Describing INF} 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Sincere, sympathetic, unassuming, submissive, weak! 
Health, Stress, Coping Males are among the three lowest on "Efficacy"? 
Overrepresented among a sample of male therapists? 
Among the three male types most “oblivious” to partner's dissatisfaction with the relationship? 
With ISTPs, ranked first among all the types in using spiritual/philosophical coping resources* 
Overrepresented among clinical psychologists compared with a range of psychologists? 


In national sample, highest in reporting stress associated with “Work,” "Intimate relationship,’ “School,” and 
“Other? 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by "Talking to professional" 
Ranked second lowest in “Positive affectivity" and third lowest in “Negative affectivity’”® 
In national sample, ranked highest in being dissatisfied with "Marriage/intimate relationship" 


te M EA, Le em nM n MÀ me enr m MÀ tee MÀ At e MS a MÀ emm c aet- Te ete Te De 











TR mm — um ct ty ma m tr Ta qr m ne i a Ra, 


Education One of two types with highest first semester college GPA’ 


Among top four types in undergraduate GPA’ 


Among highest college persisters" 


Among highest persisters at church-related schools” 


In national sample "Leisure Activities,’ overrepresented in “Writing” and “Appreciating art,” 
underrepresented in "Watching sporting events” 


Higher on deductive reasoning than Feeling types, with other dominant Intuitive types? 


With IST]s, modal type of language students at the University of Hawaii? 


Predominated among Japanese Americans in a study of classroom behaviors in children of different ethnic groups? 


Academic subjects preferred: art, English, music? 


Fe ND tah P hectare ee tt t Pan e NC d pu tt en i Ln EE a mum eum arm Ege n en Mene ee vm Eh tk nt at ao E al a ONU ERE RR o. 


Careers Most important features of an ideal job: "Use of my special abilities"? 


aa 


Three top work characteristics favored in national sample: “Variety of tasks,” "Clear structure,’ 
"Independence &amp; achievement’; lowest of all the types in liking work environments with "Opportunities 
for advancement &amp; high pay but not job security"! ! 

"ll 


Fae 


In national sample, among top four types in valuing "Spirituality, “Learning,” and "Community service 
In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions” and "Salary" in their work! 


In national sample, ranked lowest in valuing "Health" (55.375), Financial security" (50.0%), and “Prestige 
&amp; status” (096)! ! 
Occupational trends identified: religion, counseling, teaching, arts’! 


Organizations, Leadership, Higher on CPI scales Ai, Fm; lower on Do, Sy, Sp, 5a, Wb, Gi, In!* 


Management, Teams Higher on LSI scales Delegating, Dependable, Easygoing, Fair, Guarded, Initiating, Patient, 


Permissive, Reflective, Reserved, Supportive 


, 2 ~ - : : " : 
Note: P Bnef definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations." See Table 4.26; Tables 426—441 report ratings by 
subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source I Summary of salient ACL data and Q-Sort descriptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their ratings Thome &amp; Gough, 1991: “Highest three 

and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment (“Soundness” and “Efficacy”), which were calculated separately for males and females Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; 
Quenk &amp; Quenk. 1996, "Shelton, 1996, Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; See Chapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”; ‘See Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in 

Lducation”: °DiTibeno, 1996; "Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996; Hammer, 19963; | !See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; “A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 

types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15.102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; Results in the 

same study at the Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSD. 


plans to carry them through. Then they go from enthusi- — @ Criticize others, especially those who seem to them to be 
asm to enthusiasm with little actually accomplished. inefficient or incompetent 

B if they have not developed their Intuition, they may not 8 Become rebellious and combative 
take in enough relevant information, resulting in “in- — W Become scattered—unable to focus 


sights" unrelated to current reality. a : | 
=! ? It is natural for ENTPs to give less attention to their non- 


If ENTPs do not find a place where they ean use their preferred Sensing and Feeling parts. If they neglect these 
gifts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually too much, however, they may 


feel frustrated and ma* 
i B Not take care of the details and routine required to 


W Become brash, rude, and abrasive implement their insights 


B Not give enough weight to the impact of their ideas and 
plans on others 

@ Be excessively and inappropriately “challenging and 
stimulating" 


Under great stress, ENTPs can be overwhelmed by 
detail, losing their ability to generate possibilities. Then 
they focus on a minor or distorted detail, thinking that it is 
supremely important. 

Table 4.32 summarizes rclevant rescarch results for 
ENTPs. The research results for ENTPs seem to fit well with 
the way they are typically described. Their high activity 
level, multiple interests, and enthusiasm for exploring the 
limits of the environment come through in some of the ways 
they are perceived—males as lowest on the “Soundness” 
measure of adaptation, females as high on the “Efficacy” 
measure—in their frequency in remedial at-risk programs as 
high school students and as violators of college alcoho) poli- 
cies, in their high standing on creativity measures and values 
in this area, and in their overrepresentation regarding many 
leisure activities. These are just a few of the results that illus- 
trate the way in which predictable attitudes and behaviors 
develop through the exercise of type preferences. 

Also consistent with an ENTP approach to life is their 
reported standing on variables related to experiencing and 
coping with stress. They have the highest mean level of 
coping resources and are highest in coping with stress by 
“confronting the problem," report the lowest stress in sev- 
eral life areas, are lowest in reporting heart disease and 
hypertension, and are low in job burnout measures. These 
results are consistent with observations suggesting that 
ENTPs and their companion dominant extraverted Intu- 
itive type, the ENFPs, seem to seek out and function effec- 
tively at high levels of siress—at least from thc point of view 
of other types. This suggests that the perception of stress 
varies markedly across the types. Further discussion of 
stress variables appears in Chapter 10. 

One intriguing result shown in fable 4.32 is the exactly 
opposite standing of ENTPs (dominant extraverted Intuitive 
types with auxiliary introverted Thinking) and INTJs (domi- 
nant introverted Intuitive types with auxiliary Extraverted 
Thinking) on “fear of reinjury” among chronic pain patients. 
INTJs reported the highest fear and ENTPs the lowest. 
One might speculate about the possible differential role of 
the inferior function of these types on this very specific 
behavior. 

Results in the education, career, and organization arcas 
further confirm the descriptive characteristics of ENTPs. 
Their high assertiveness (reported in the personality con- 
tent area) is readily connected to their independence and 
initiating results on Leadership scales. They are high on 
Dominanee, Capacity for Status, Sociability, Social Pres- 
ence, Sell-Acceptance, Tolerance, and similar scales that 
are predictable for their type, and lower on Responsibility; 
Socialization, Self-Control, Communality, Achievement 
via Conformity, and Femininity/Masculinity—also not 
surprising associations. 





Understanding the 16 Types 79 





As we shall see, many of the results lound for ENTPs are 
also characteristic of ENFPs (Table 4.33), the other domi- 
nant extraverted Intuitive type. 


ENFP: Extraverted Intuition 
with Introverted Feeling 


Dominant function: Nr 
Auxiliary function: F} 
Tertiary function: Tj 


Fourth/inferior function: S 


At Their Best For people with ENFP preferences, life is a 
creative adventure full of exciting possibilities. ENFPs arc 
keenly perceptive about people and insightful about the 
present and future. They experience a wide range of feelings 
and intense emotions. They need affirmation from others 
and readily give appreciation and support. 

ENFPs are good at understanding how people and 
groups work and are persuasive and compelling in pursu- 
ing what is important to them. Thev are adaptable, bloom- 
ing where they are planted. Their energy and enthusiasm 
encourage others to hloom as well. 


Characteristics of ENFPs ENFPs are innovators, 
initiating projects and directing great energy into getting 
them underway. Using Intuition primarily externally, they 
are stimulated by new people, ideas, and experiences. They 
find meaning and significance readily and see connections 
that others don't. They are likely 10 be 


B Curious, creative, and imaginative 
8 Energetic, enthusiastic, and spontaneous 


ENFPs value harmony and goodwill. They like to please 
others and will adapt to others’ needs and wishes when pos- 
sible. ENFPs primarily use Feeling internally, making deci- 
sions by applying personal values through identification 
and empathy with others. ENFPs are likely to be 


m Warm, friendly, and caring 
8 Cooperative and supportive 


ENFPs have exceptional insight into possibilities in oth- 
ers and the energy and motivation to help actualize them. 
They feel confident moving ahead based on their insights, 
and their enthusiasm tends to bring others along with them. 


How Others May See Them ENFPs are usually lively, 
gregarious, and sociable, with a large circle of friends. They 
are interested in almost everything and bring a zest to life 
that draws others to them. At the same time, they value 
depth and authenticity in their close relationships and 
direct great energv to creating and supporting open and 
honest communication. 

ENFPs hate routinc, schedules, and structure and usu- 
ally manage to avoid them. They are normally verbally ftu- 
ent, cven in cxtemporancous situations; however, when 
their deepest values need expression, they may suddenly be 


80 Theory 


—— — — —— 


Table 4.32 Research Describing ENTP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Enterprising, friendly, resourceful, headstrong, self-centered! 


Health, Stress, Coping Males among three lowest on "Soundness"; females among three highest on "Efficacy"? 


Overrepresented among female substance abusers? 


Overrepresented among those having Type A behavior? 


With ENFPs, had highest mean level of coping resources* 


Reported lowest fear of reinjury of all the types among a group suffering long-term pain* 


One of four types in college reporting the highest levels of assertiveness' 


In national sample, lowest in reporting stress associated with "Children," "Intimate relationship," and 
"Health"? 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by "Confronting the problem"? 


In national sample, ranked lowest in "Ever had heart disease/hypertension"? 


In national sample, ranked third highest in "Not Sure" re: “Belief in higher spiritual power"? 


Ranked IURE lowest on "Emotional exhaustion" and lowest in "Depersonalization" burnout scales? 


——— =" SS — EE dm E TE Un EE Re m e m a -=ne rt en ee 


Education Males among three highest on two out of three measures of creativity; females among three highest on 
one out of two measures of creativity® 


Projected self second-greatest number of years into the future in essays” 


Frequent among high school students in remedial at-risk program" 


One of two types most frequent among college alcoho! policy violators’ 


** 44 


In national sample“Leisure Activities,’ overrepresented in “Taking classes, going to school,” “Writing,” 
“Appreciating art,’ "Playing sports,’ “Playing with computers or video games’; underrepresented in 
"Watching TV three hours or more per day" 


With other dominant Intuitive types, were higher on deductive reasoning than Feeling types? 
With INTPs, among middle school students, had lower grades than aptitude scores would predict? 


More frequent among African American males compared with Howard University males? 


Academic subjects preferred: art, science? 


Careers Most important features of an ideal job: creativity and originality! 


In national sample, highest of all types liking work environment characteristics "Independence &amp; 
achievement" and "Opportunities for advancement &amp; high pay, but not job security" and including 
"Variety of tasks" and "Clear structure" among top three characteristics; one of top three types liking 
"International opportunities" as a characteristic? 


In national sample, among those types most dissatisfied with work and among those with highest income!? 


In "Organizational Values,” value “Autonomy” and "Achievement"? 


Pr 46 


In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions,” "Opportunity to use talents,’ and "Salary" in their work? 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample? 


Occupational trends identified: science, managemenk aaee arts? 


"————— —J''Á——— —————— ————— Pr — En ERE rn PLE E PLE ————————————— 


Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scales Do, Cs, Sy, Sp, Sa, To, Ai, le, Py, Fx, In, Em; lower on Re, So, Sc, Cm, Ac, Fm? 


Management, Teams Higher on LSI scales Independent, Initiating! ^ 


Departure from SYMLOG Most Effective Leader Profile: seen as underemphasizing "Active teamwork 
toward a common goal,” "Efficiency, strong impartial management,” "Collaborative work,” "Trust in the 
goodness of others"; seen as overemphasizing "Self-protection, self-interest first,’ "Popularity and social 


success" !? 





Note: Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations." See Table 4.26; l4Tables 4.26—4.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


: ar ? 
Source "Summary of salient ACL data and Q-Sort descriptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their ratings. Thome &amp; Gough, 1991; “Highest three 


and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment ("Soundness" and " Efficacy"), which were calculated separately for males and females. Thome &amp; Gough, 1991; 

Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; "Shelton, 1996; ?See Chapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and BW apy”, "Highest three and lowest three types on three measures of 
creativity, calculate &gt;d separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; ‘See Chapter 11, “Uses of » pe in Education" , "DiTiberio, 1996; "Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996, 

: Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; l Hammer, 19963, see C hapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; ^A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of 
the CPI using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership dev elopment programs at the Center for Credfive Leadership. Fleenor, 1997, “Results in the same study at the 
Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSD); ^A study using SYMLOG analysis of 529 subjects from the top three ners of management. Ratings of 
SYMLOG values for the 16 types were averaged across all raters. Sundstrom &amp; Busby, 1997 


awkward and express their judgments with uncharacteristic 
intensity. Others usually see ENFPs as 


B Personable, perceptive, and persuasive 
m Enthusiastic, spontaneous, and versatile 
B Giving and seeking affirmation 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ENFPs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Feeling and Intuitive preferences. 


BW lÍ they have not developed their Feeling, they may go 
from enthusiasm to enthusiasm, never committing the 
energy necessary to actualize their insights, or they may 
make overly personal decisions. 

m It they have not developed their Intuition, they may fail 
to take in enough information, lack trust in their own 
insights, be uncertain, and accept others’ perceptions too 


quickly. 


If ENFPs do not find a place where they can use their 
gifts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually 
feel frustrated and may 


W Become scattered, have trouble focusing, be easily dis- 
tracted 

B Fail to follow through on decisions 

Become rebellions, excessively nonconforming 

BW Ignore deadlines and procedures 


[t is natural for ENFPs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Sensing and Thinking parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Not take care of the details and routine required for 
implementing their inspirations 

w Overextend themselves—have trouble saying no to 
interesting possibilities and people 

B Fail to apply reason and logic to assess their inspirations 
and decisions 


Under great stress, ENFPs may become overwhelmed by 
detail and lose their normal perspective and sense of options. 
Then they tend to focus on an unimportant or distorted 
detail, letting it become the central fact of their universe. 

Table 4.33 summarizes relevant research results for 
ENFPs. Not unexpectedly, the results in Table 4.33 are quite 
similar in many ways to those for ENTPs and are therefore 
not repeated in detail for ENFPs. This is the case regarding 
their standing on physical symptoms of stress, being lowest 
in reporting stress in a number of life areas and having 
highest reported levels of coping resources. Interesting dif- 
ferences are that one study found ENTPs overrepresented 
among substance abusers, and they were also frequent types 
to violate alcohol policy. However, they were not referred 
more frequently in college to substance abuse workshops. 
ENFPs, in contrast, were overrepresented in this arca in col- 
lege but did not appear more frequently in actual substance 
abuse groups—at least based on the available data. 


Understanding the 16 Types 8l 





Both ENTPs and ENFPs ranked third highest in not 
being sure regarding a beliel in a higher spiritual power 
(note that the large majority of every type indicated such 
belief, as shown in Chapter 10). Different studies also indi- 
cate that students of both types may be seen as troubled 
and/or troublesome at school, with ENTPs likely also to be 
seen as underachievers—a result in accord with observations 
by teachers and parents. While both ENTPs and ENEPs indi- 
cate art as a preference in academic subjects, ENFPs indicate 
English and music in contrast to ENTPs' attraction to sci- 
ence. ENFPs also appear to be attracted to careers in educa- 
tion, while this does not appear to be the case for ENTPs. 
Their occcupational trends also differ except for a shared 
interest in art, with ENFPs attracted to counseling, teach- 
ing, and religion and ENTPs to science, management, and 
technology. 

[n the carcer area, creativity, independence, and variety 
are important for both dominant extraverted Intuitive 
types. ENFPs are notable in their valuing of home and fam- 
ily, friendships, and community service—all areas that may 
rellect their auxiliary Feeling function. ENFPs are found to 
be underrepresented among working MBA students, while 
ENTPs are overrepresented in this category. 








ISTP: Introverted Thinking 
with Extraverted Sensing 


Dominant function: Tj 
Auxiliary function: Sg 
Tertiary function: Ng 


Fourth/inferior function: Fy 


At Their Best People with ISTP preferences carefully 
observe what is going on around them. Then, when the 
need arises, they move quickly to get to the core of a 
problem and solve it with the greatest efficiency and the 
least effort. They are interested in how and why things work 
but find abstract theories uninteresting unless they can 
quickly apply them. They often function as troubleshooters. 

ISTPs resist regimentation and rules, thrive on variety 
and novelty, and enjoy the challenge of solving a new, con- 
crete, extensive problem. 


Characteristics of ISTPs ISTPs use their Thinking 
primarily internally to see the essential structure underlying 
the facts. Their minds seem to work almost like computers, 
organizing data, reasoning impersonally and objectively. 
They make rational decisions based on a great deal of 
concrete data. ISTPs are likely to be 


m Detached and objective critics 
m Analytical and logical problem solvers 


ISTPs are realists, focusing on what is and what can be 
done with it, rather than on theoretical possibilities. They 


82 Theory 


Table 4.33 Research Describing ENFP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Education 


Careers 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


Enthusiastic, outgoing, spontaneous, changeable, impulsive! 

Overrepresented among a sample of male therapists? 

Overrepresented among new college students referred for a substance abuse workshop? 
Underrepresented among female coronary heart disease patients? 

Underrepresented among men with chronic pain? 


With EST]s, had highest total coping resource scores of all the types? 


With ENTPs, had highest mean level of coping resources? 


Ranked first of all 16 types in using social and emotional coping resources, and second in using cognitive 
resources 


In national sample, lowest in reporting stress associated with "Other" * 


In national sample, lowest in coping with stress by "Developing physical symptoms" * 


In national sample, ranked fourth lowest in "Ever had heart disease/hypertension"^ 


In national sample, ranked third highest in "Not Sure" re: “Belief in higher spiritual power" ^ 


PE ————— —À &gt; —— —"————— aia ln patte a mm Ig EOD, a lo Dn Dtm t n] rl MO Can e uo Dn De RA aT I M de A Rm 7 7 a ei, me hen fe, Pa 





Males and females among three highest on one measure of creativity? 


Highly represented among third- to sixth-grade academically talented students? 


Innovatively creative learners 


As teachers, least likely to see student behaviors as serious problems 
Second most frequent among national CASE professor of the year finalists 


Third most frequent among education majors in college 


As teachers, prefer whole language approach to reading instruction? 


Rated by psychologists among three types most likely to have trouble in school® 


In national sample "Leisure Activities,’ overrepresented in “Writing, “Appreciating art, "Playing musical 


instrument," "Listening to music,’ “Reading”; underrepresented in "Watching TV for leisure" and 
"Watching TV three hours or more per day" $ 


Higher on deductive reasoning than Feeling types, with other dominant Intuitive types’ 


Among African American college students, most underrepresented among those with an Intuition 
preference (where N was underrepresented)’ 


Academic subjects preferred: art, English, music? 


Most important features of an ideal job: creativity and originality? 
In the national sample, lowest of all the types in liking work environments where "Everything is done by 


the book”; one of three highest types in liking “Independence &amp; achievement,’ “Teamwork,” and "People 
from different backgrounds” !° 


In national sample "Organizational Values,” place low value on "Achievement within system"! 


*» be we dà 


In national sample, among top four types in valuing “Home/family.’ “Friendships.” "Creativity; "Learning," 
and “Community service" 


In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions” and “Salary”: satisfied with "People | work with" in their 
10 
work 


In national sample, ranked highest in valuing "Relationships &amp; friendships" (79.5%), and "Being creative" 
(SS. 1950 


Underrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample! 
Underrepresented among male small business owners compared with national sample? 
Occupational trends identified: counseling, teaching, religion, arts '? 

Higher on CPI scales Do, Cs, Sy, Sp. Sa, To, Ai, le, Fx, In, Em; lower on So, Sc, Gi, Cm, Ac!! 
Higher on LS] scales Appreciative, Easygoing, Energetic, Resourceful, Understanding"? 


Showed change on at least four of seven leadership items in Naval Academy leadership behavior study in 
which type training was followed by feedback from lower-ranked students!3 


, : 2 ' ; " 3 . mM ) 
Note: Bnef definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13. "Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; ! "Tables 426-4 41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source. Summary of salient ACL data and Q-Sort descriptions ol 12 of the 16 types Raters were naive to type when making their ratings. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, 

^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; *Shelton, 1996, *Sec € hapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”; ? Highest three and lowest three types on three measures of creativ- 
ity, calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, See C hapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education"; ‘Diltberno, 1996; “Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, “Hammer, 
1996a, ! See € hapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling", 11A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15.102 people 
who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; ^Results in the same study at the Center for Create Leadership on the 
Leadership Style Indicator (LSD), | 3Walck, 1996. 


are often creative at dealing with the immediate problems 
and good at hands-on tasks. ISTPs are likely to be 


B Practical and realistic 
B Factual and pragmatic 


ISTPs are expedient and believe in economy of effort — 
doing only what is needed with the least possible discussion 
and fuss. Their focus is on getting the desired results. 


How Others May See Them  ISTPs are egalitarian and 
generally tolerant of a wide range of behavior—until their 
ruling logical principles are attacked. A1 that point, they can 
surprise others by expressing their firm and clear 
judgments. ISTPs listen and seem to agree because they are 
not disagreeing; later, others may find the ISTP was 
analyzing and making internal judgments. 

With their constant scanning for information and focus 
on results, ISTPs will change course readily if they see 
another, more efficient way. Because of this, others some- 
times have trouble *reading" them. They tend to be quiet 
and reserved, though they can be quite talkative in areas in 
which they have a lot of knowledge. Others usually see 
ISTPsas 


B Adaptable, action-oriented risk takers 
8 Confident, independent, and self-determined 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ISTPs in the development and ex- 
pression ol their Sensing and Thinking preferences. 


B If they have not developed their Sensing, ISTPs may 
have no reliable way of getting accurate data about the 
external world or of translating their thoughts into 
action. 

B Ifthey have not developed their Thinking, they may get 
caught up in the realities around them and not take time 
to do the internal logical processing they need to make 
good decisions. Then their actions may be haphazard 
responses to immediate needs. 


If ISTPs do not find a place where they can use their gifts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually feel 
frustrated and may 


B Become cynical and negative critics 
B Withdraw their attention and energy 
W Postpone decisions 


It is natural for ISTPs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Feeling and Intuitive parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Overlook others’ emotional needs and values 

m Not give sufficient weight to the impacts of their deci- 
sions on others 

B Focus so intently on immediate results that they lose 
track of the long-term ramifications of their decisions 
and actions 


Understanding the 16 Types 83 


Under great stress, ISTPs may erupt outwardly in inap- 
propriate displays of emotion. The resulting explosive 
anger or hurt tearfulness is quite unnerving to others and 
embarrassing to the usually calm and controlled ISTP 

Table 4.34 summarizes relevant research results for 
ISTPs. The research summarized in Table 4.34 for ISTPs with 
regard to stress-related variables bears some obvious similari- 
ties to the results shown in Table 4.26 for ISTJs. Bear in mind 
that ISTP dynamics are dominant introverted Thinking with 
auxiliary extraverted Sensing, while dynamics for IST] are 
dominant introverted Sensing with auxiliary extraverted 
Thinking. Thus, although these two tvpes share all but one 
letter, their dominant and auxiliary functions and the atti- 
tudes in which they are habitually used are different. l1 seems 
that sharing the three letters creates many similarities in the 
stress area, while in many other respects the different dynam- 
ics of these two types lead to quite different research results 
in other areas, for example in personality descriptors, aca- 
demic interests, and career and organization variables. 

It is equally interesting to compare the ISTP picture with 
that presented in Table 4.28 for ESTPs. ISTPs and ESTPs 
use their preferred functions in the same attitudes—that is, 
both extravert Sensing and introvert Thinking, but the ISTP 
has dominant introverted Thinking and auxiliary extra- 
verted Sensing, while the ESTP has dominant extraverted 
Sensing and auxiliary introverted Thinking. The effects ol 
their different dynamics are quite dramatic in the stress and 
coping areas and in other ways as well. 

Although it appears that the commonality of letters to 
IST] types rather than type dynamics is operating regarding 
stress variables, it is also plausible that the underlying rea- 
sons for these similar stress responses may be quite differ- 
ent for these two types. The same attitude or behavior is 
often stimulated and motivated by quite different issues for 
different types, and the same issues may be expressed quite 
differently in the attitudes and behaviors of different types. 
These observations apply to type similarities and differ- 
ences in general. 

ISTPs are reported to be overrepresented in substance 
abuse, heart disease, and hypertension groups, post-traumatic 
stress disorder patients, and risk for setbacks due to over- 
doing among long-term pain patients. They rank low in 
assertiveness, low in mean level of coping resources, lowest 
in using social coping resources, and highest in coping with 
stress by expressing anger and upset, although they were 
lowest in stress associated with balancing home and work. 
They also ranked lowest in positive allectivity and appeared 
in the four most dissatisfied groups with regard to marriage 
and intimate relationships. What could account for these 
"negative "-seeming results? 

Perhaps of all the types, ISTPs may be the most specific in 
what they find acceptable and appealing and what makes no 
"logical" sense to them. Their particular dynamics may thus 
be associated with resistance to accepting and appreciating 
points of view divergent from their own. [his is consistent 
with an approach that looks at life through a lens of logical 
analysis applied to concrete reality: 


84 Theorv 


Table 4.34 Research Describing ISTP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Females among the three lowest on "Soundness"'! 


Health, Stress, Coping 2 


Overrepresented among males in a substance abuse program 


Overrepresented among men at risk for heart attack? 


Overrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program? 


Overrepresented among male hypertensive patients? 


Overrepresented among men with chronic pain? 


Overrepresented among males with post-traumatic stress disorder? 


With INTPs, had lowest mean level of coping resources? 


With ESTPs, at highest risk for setbacks due to overdoing among those with long-term pain? 


With INF|s, ranked first among all the types in using spiritual/philosophical coping resources? 


Ranked lowest of all 16 types in using social coping resources? 


One of the four types in college reporting the lowest levels of assertiveness? 


In national sample, lowest in reporting stress associated with "Balancing home and work”? 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by "Getting upset and angry and showing it"* 


In national sample, ranked second highest in "Ever had heart disease/hypertension"^ 


In national sample, ranked fourth highest in “No” and highest in "Not Sure" re: “Belief in higher spiritual 
rg 
power 


Ranked lowest in “Positive affectivity’’ 
In national sample, ranked fourth most dissatisfied with "Marriage/intimate relationship" 


Education Males among three lowest on one of three measures of creativity; females among three highest on one 
of two measures of creativity? 


Among three types rated by psychologists as most likely to have trouble in school® 


Frequent among high school students in remedial at-risk program® 


Highly represented among male college scholarship athletes® 


Among lowest in college retention® 


In national sample “Leisure Activities,” overrepresented in “Playing with computers or video games’; 
underrepresented in “Listening to music" and "Writing" 


Performed lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Thinking types? 
With ESTPs, modal types of language students at the University of Hawaii? 
Academic subjects preferred: math, practical skills? 


= P — pre sem EE c———————— eee Leute. Aia pr —PPBPáÓÓ— 


Careers Most important feature of an ideal job:"A stable and secure future"? 


In national sample, highest of all types liking "Independence &amp; achievement" in the work environment, and 
including in top three desirable characteristics “Clear structure” and “Variety of tasks" ! 


In national sample “Organization Values,” place low value on ‘Outgoing affiliation" and "Financial analysis"! l 


In national sample, among top four types in valuing “Autonomy”! | 


In national sample, dissatisfied with "Promotions" in their work!! 


Occupational trends identified: skilled trades, technical fields, agriculture, law enforcement, military! ! 


ndi ————— 


Organizations, Leadership, | No CPI scales higher; lower on CPI scales Do, Cs, Sy, Sp, Sa, VVb, Re, To, Gi, Ac, Ai, le, Py, In, Em"? 


Management,Teams Higher on LSI scales Critical, Detached, Guarded, Independent, Resourceful’? 


Departures from Most Effective Profile: underemphasize "Active teamwork toward a common goal," 
"Efficiency, strong impartial management,” "Having a good time,” “Friendship,” "Equality"; overemphasize 
"Self-protection, self-interest first"! 


In a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict, tended to compromise!? 





jen o ; a x : - n . o 2 . 
Note: "Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations." See Table 4.26; !?Tables 4.26—4.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source Highest three and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment (“Soundness” and "Efficacy "), which were calculated separately for males and 
females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; ^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; "Shelton, 1996; "See Chapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”; ^ Highest three and lowest three 
types on three measures of creativity, calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, "See Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education”, ‘DiTiberto, 1996; 
"Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996; "Myers &amp; MeCaulley, 1985; "Hammer, 19962, ! see C hapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling"; ^A study that compared the mean scores of the 
16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs al the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; 

Results in the same study at the Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSI); A study using SYMLOG analysis of 529 subjects from the top three 
uers of management Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 16 types were averaged across all raters Sundstrom &amp; Busby, 1997; "Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996 


Such an approach is further shown in the specificity of 
their viewpoint in the education, career, and organization 
areas. They are highest of the types in valuing independence 
and achievement in a career; they also highly value auton- 
omy, clear structures, and task variety. As leaders, they appear 
critical, detached, guarded, independent, and resourceful, 
and they also do not seem to consider people and relation- 
ship factors to be of importance. Further emphasizing the 
suggestion that this type marches to a quite different drum- 
mer than many other types is that they do not come out 
higher on any CPI scale and are lower on many scales that 
reflect characteristics that are highly valued in our culture— 
Dominance, Capacity for Status, Sociability, Social Presence, 
Sell-Acceptance, and Well-Being (these latter two may re- 
flect the effect of others’ perception of them). They are also 
Jower on Responsibility, Tolerance, Good Impression, both 
kinds of achievement, Intellectual Efficiency, Psychological- 
Mindedness, Independence, and Empathy. It is important 
to recognize that these “low” positions on scales are quite 
consistent with a dominant function that emphasizes objec- 
tivity and a dispassionate seeking after truth and accuracy. 

One research result suggests that ISTPs may have quali- 
ties that are not often seen by others. In the study of coping 
resources, ISTPs were tied with INFJs as the type with the 
highest rank in using spiritual/philosophical coping 
resources. That these two quite different types are similar 
in this regard is intriguing. We might infer that there are 
aspects of ISTP inner life that few people see. In fact, expe- 
rience verifies that ISTPs share their most private and inti- 
mate thoughts and feelings with a very few, select people. 
This selectivity likely contributes to the difficulty other 
types have in understanding, appreciating, and getting 
close to the essence of the ISTP nature. 


INTP: Introverted Thinking 
with Extraverted Intuition 


Dominant function: T} 
Auxiliary function: Ng 
Tertiary function: Sg 


Fourth/inferior function: Fr 


At Their Best People with INTP preferences are inde- 
pendent problem solvers who excel at providing a detached, 
concise analysis of an idea or situation. They ask the diffi- 
cult questions, challenging others and themselves to find 
new logical approaches. 

INTPs' best work may emerge when they are allowed to 
work independently on a problem whose solution requires 
an approach that runs counter to prevailing wisdom or 
knowledge. Though they typically work best alone, their 
incisive critiques and summaries can assist a group in get- 
ting to the core of complex problems. 


Characteristics of INTPs INTPs use their Thinking 
primarily internally to find or develop underlying principles 
and logical structures for understanding and explaining the 


Understanding the 16 Types 85 


world. They approach almost everything with skepticism, 
form their own opinions and standards, and apply these 
standards rigorously to themselves. They highly value 
intelligence and competence. INTPs are likely to be 


W Logical, analytical, and objectively critical 
B Detached and contemplative 


INTPs see possibilities and connections beyond the pres- 
ent and obvious. They are curious and seek knowledge for 
its own sake. They love to theorize and discuss abstrac- 
tions. INTPs are usually 


8 Mentally quick, insightful, and ingenious 
B Intensely curious about ideas, theories, and what makes 
things work 


INTPs quickly see inconsistencies and illogicality and 
enjoy taking apart and reworking ideas. They naturally 
build complex theoretical systems to explain the realities 
they see. They find it difficult to work on routine tasks but 
bring great energy, intensity, and focus to researching or 
analyzing a complex problem that arouses their curiosity. 


How Others May See Them INTPs are usually quiet and 
reserved though they can be talkative in areas in which they 
are especially knowledgeable. Unless their work requires 
action, they are more interested in the challenge of finding 
solutions than in putting solutions to practical use. They 
prefer not to organize people or situations. 

INTPs are tolerant of a wide range of behavior, arguing 
and raising issues only when they believe it is reasonable to 
do so. This flexibility disappears, however, when their rul- 
ing principles are challenged; then they stop adapting. 
INTPs prize precision in communication and dislike redun- 
dancy or stating the obvious. They want to express the exact 
truth, but they may make it so complex that others have dif- 
ficulty understanding. Others usually see INTPs as 


B Quiet, contained, calm, and detached observers 
B independent, valuing autonomy 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported INTPs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Intuitive and Thinking preferences. 


B If they have not developed their Intuition, INTPs may 
have no reliable way of taking in information and be 
immersed in their internal logical systems. Then they find 
it difficult to actualize or even communicate their ideas. 

B If they have not developed their Thinking, they may go 
from insight to insight, never analyzing them with a crit- 
ical eye or integrating them into a whole. 


If INTPs do not find a place where they can use their 
gilts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usu- 
ally fee] frustrated and may 


B Become cynical and negative critics 
B Be sarcastic and destructively critical 


86 Theory 


Table 4.35 Research Describing INTP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Females among three lowest on "Soundness" 





Candid, ingenious, shrewd, complicated, rebellious’ 


2 


Highly represented among college students taking foreign languages? 


Rated by psychologists among three types most likely to have trouble in school? 


Most frequent among college students referred for alcohol and drug violations 


3 


Among females, more likely to persist in engineering school? 


Males were highest on "obliviousness index" (relatively unaware of spouse's dissatisfaction with the 


relationship)? 


One of three types overrepresented among female substance abusers 


Overrepresented among females in a substance abuse program 


4 
4 


Overrepresented among males with post-traumatic stress disorder? 


With ISTPs, had lowest mean level of coping resources; ranked l6th out of 16 types on total resources 


5 


Ranked | 5th out of the 16 types on using both cognitive and social coping resources, and l6th on using 


emotional resources? 


Underrepresented as clinical psychologists compared with psychologists in general® 


In national sample, ranked third highest in "No" and second highest in “Not Sure" re: “Belief in higher spiritual 


power" 


Ranked fourth lowest in “Positive affectivity”” 


Education 


Rae apt le Pea m mte halt qat net mi^ e eT a DD o e a 


In national sample, third highest in dissatisfaction with “Marriage/intimate relationship" 


a Date faf t eae Poca an a teg ser aae Ca T le S dts tor nie eer n tir dete ^n ntn lip 


Males among three highest on two of three measures of creativity; females among three highest on 
one of three measures of creativity? 


Performed significantly lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Thinking types? 


With ENTPs, had lower grades than would be predicted from aptitude scores among middle school 


students? 


Males more likely to persist in school among engineering school students? 


Academic subjects preferred: art, science 


6 


5,95 66 59 66 


In national sample “Leisure Activities;' overrepresented in “Appreciating art,’ “Writing,” “Taking classes, 


39 66 


going to school, 


m Isolate themselves and put off action 
m Engage in verbal sparring and arguments 


It is natural for INTPs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Feeling and Sensing parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


m Be insensitive to the needs of others for information and 
emotional connection 

m Decide something they or others value is not important 
because it is “not logical” 

g Fail to consider the impact of their ideas or style of 
expression on others 

w Be impractical, forgetting details such as appropriate 
dress, unpaid bills, physical needs 


Under great stress, INTPs may erupt outwardly in inap- 
propriate displays of emotion. The resulting explosive 
anger or hurt tearfulness is quite unnerving to others and 
embarrassing to the usually calm and controlled INTP 

Table 4.35 summarizes relevant research results for 
INTPs. Most of the similarities of INTPs to their companion 


Playing with computers or video games 


Tuum t rn v m Mg a RC MR Tt RD n D m Can at ns Tr a NE aam m RB ai Cua 72 Da 2o IORI “ar Train to Oa C- 7a ah al ts n sn ole ort gus EOI SP pte 4D MET rR tay” =P E i Pa Cor E 


»3 





dominant introverted Thinking type, ISTPs, appear in the 
area of personality, stress, and coping variables. An inter- 
esting difference in this area is the INTPS standing as being 
highest on the “obliviousness index” that reflects lack of 
awareness of a partners dissatisfaction with the relation- 
ship, whereas they are similar to the ISTPs in themselves 
being high in dissatisfaction with their relationship. This 
result, like others reviewed, may reflect an interesting 
nuance in understanding the types. That INFJ men are sec- 
ond highest in *obliviousness" (Table 4.31) requires con- 
sideration of the likely different perceptions and motiva- 
tions of INTPs and INFJs, a point made previously in the 
carlier discussion of ISTPs. 

Some similarities and many differences appear in the 
areas of education, careers, and organizations. INIPs are 
seen as highly creative, while ISTPs are among the lowest 
in this regard, and INTPs' educational and recreational 
interests tend to be more artistic and intellectual than 
those of ISTPs. Their ideal job includes creativity, original- 
ity, and earning a lot of money, as compared with the “sta- 
ble and secure future” characteristic of ISTPs. Both types 


Table 4.35 Research Describing INTP continued 


Careers 


Understanding the 16 Types 87 


Most important features of an ideal job: creativity and originality; earning a lot of money'? 


*9 a4 


Lowest of all types in liking work environments with “Clear structures &amp; responsibilities,’ "Employee loyalty 
&amp; job security" and "Working as part of a team"; one of three highest types liking work environments with 
"International opportunities" and "Advancementupay but not job security”; include in top three desirable work 


environment characteristics “Variety of tasks,’ "Independence &amp; achievement,’ and "Clear structures 


»* 44 


With INFPs, most dissatisfied with work they do, where they work, and future work opportunities, and 


likely to leave job! ! 


In "Organizational Values,” place high value on “Autonomy 


oo] ] 


th 46 so ae 


In national sample, dissatisfied with “Promotions, “Salary,” “Job security,’ Predictability,’ and “Working 


conditions "! ! 


In national sample, ranked highest in valuing “Autonomy, freedom, independence" and lowest in valuing 


"Religion or spirituality"! ! 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample! ' 


mm an ee ———— a en 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


Understanding? 


Occupational trends identified: scientific/technical fields! ! 


————————— Ó— — ———————H e A E 


AL Re asa min hme m — — — ———— 


Higher on CPI scales Ai, le, Py, Fx, In; lower on Do, Sy, Sa, Wb. Re, So, Sc, Gi, Cm, Ac!? 


Higher on LSI scales Dogmatic, Easygoing, Energetic, Fair, Independent, Initiating, Resourceful, 


Rated higher than the eight other types in study on SYMLOG value “Tough-minded, self-oriented 
assertiveness” as well as "Rugged, self-oriented individualism” and “Passive rejection of popularity, going it 
alone" and lower than all but two of the types on "Obedience to the chain of command, complying with 


authority"! 4 


Departures from SYMLOG Most Effective Profile: seen as underemphasizing “Active teamwork toward a 
common goal,” "Efficiency, strong impartial management,” "Popularity and social success" (significantly 


?* 46 Fras 


lower than EST|s, ENTPs, and Feeling types),"Protecting less able members,” "Collaborative work,’ “Trust 
in the goodness of others,’ "Friendship"; seen as overemphasizing “Self-protection, self-interest first,” 
"Self-oriented assertiveness” (more than any other type)," Passive rejection of popularity, going it alone" 
(more than any other type), "Passive noncooperation with authority"; deviated furthest from organizational 


culture's notion of teamwork! ^ 


In a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict, cended to compromise 


1S 


On teamwork variables, were found to value self-oriented individualism that may interfere with 


teamwork!? 


Note: Brief definitions of these CP) scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations," See Table 4.26; Tables 4.26—4.41 report ratings by 
subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Sourcc: Summary of salient ACL data aud Q-Sort descrnptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their ranugs. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, “Highest three 
and lowest three types ou two measures of personal adjustment (“Sounduess” and “Efficacy”), which were calculated separately for males aud females Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991. 

See Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education”: *Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; Shelton, 1996; Myers &amp; MeCaulley, 1985, ‘See Chapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychother- 
apy“. “Highest three and lowest three types ou three measures of creativity, calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; 9DiTibeno, 1996; !CHammer, 19962, 
See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; ^A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15.102 people who 


aitended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; 


Results in the same study at the Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership 


Style Indicator (LSI); "A study using SYMLOG analysis of 529 subjects from the top three tiers of management. Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 16 types were averaged across all 


raters. Sundstrom &amp; Bushy, 1997; l?Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996 


like a variety of tasks at work. INTPs seem quite dissatis- 
lied with many aspects of their work lives, which may be 
partially related to the high value they place on autonomy, 
freedom, and independence—qualities that may be diffi- 
cult to find and maintain in many work environments. 
While INTPs show lower scores on some of the same 
CPI scales as ISTPs, notably the ones reflecting “relation- 
ship” issues, unlike the ISTPs they are higher on scales that 
“fit” their type—Achievement via Independence, Intellec- 
tual Efficiency, Psychological-Mindedness, Flexibility, and 
Independence. They are also understandably lower on 
Achievement via Conformity. ISTPs are lower on both kinds 


of achievement. Other organizational variables reveal many 
other ways in which the INTP preference for working inde- 
pendently is expressed and viewed by others. 

Both the "positive"-appearing and "negative "-appearing 
research results for INTPs are consistent with the charac- 
teristics that we would reasonably expect to develop 
given INTP dynamics. The results for both ISTPs and 
INTPs, like those for some of the other Introverted types, 
put societal values in sharp relief in revealing that the qual- 
ities that are most meaningful and motivating for particu- 
lar types may be devalued and unappreciated in the larger 
society. 


88 . Theory 


EST]: Extraverted Thinking 
with Introverted Sensing 


Dominant function: Tg 
Auxiliary function: Sı 
Tertiary function: Ny 


Fourth/inferior function: F; 


At Their Best People with ESTJ preferences like to organize 
projects, operations, procedures, and people and then act to 
get things done. They live by a set of clear standards and 
beliefs, make a systematic effort to follow these, and expect 
the same of others. They value competence, efficiency, and 
results and display them in their work and play. 

They enjoy interacting and working with others, as long as 
the others are responsible about meeting deadlines and com- 
pleting assigned tasks. They work best in situations where 
clear, known problems can be solved with proven techniques. 


Characteristics of ESTJs ESTJs take an objective approach 
to problem solving and are tough when the situation 
requires toughness. They use their Thinking primarily 
externally to organize their lives and work, and they have 
little patience with confusion, inefficiency, or halfway 
measures. EST]Js are likely to be 


@ logical, analytical, and objectively critical 
B Decisive, clear, and assertive 


ESTJs focus on the present—what is real and actual. 
They apply and adapt relevant past experience to deal with 
problems, and they prefer jobs where results are immediate, 
visible, and tangible. ESTJs are likely to be 


WB Practical, realistic, and matter-of-fact 
W Systematic and pragmatic | 


ESTJs are usually excellent administrators because they 
understand systems and logistics. They can project the 
steps needed to accomplish a task, foresee potential prob- 
lems, assign responsibilities, and marshal resources. They 
cover all the bases, leave no loose ends, and get things done 
on time. When they see things are not working, they will 
plan and act to correct the situation. Otherwise, they prefer 
proven procedures and systems. Their orientation is to 
tasks, action, and the bottom line. 


How Others May See Them Because they naturally 
devise systems, procedures, and schedules, others rely on 
ESTJs to take charge and get things done. Others may also 
find them overpowering at times because ESTJs are so 
certain about how things should be. Because they are clear 
and straightforward in their communication, people seldom 
have to wonder where they stand. 

ESTJs can be quite gregarious and generally enjoy inter- 
acting with people, especially around tasks, games, tradi- 
tions, and family activities. They take relationship roles 


seriously and fulfill them responsibly. Others usually see 
ESTJs as 


W Conscientious and dependable 
B Decisive, outspoken, and self-confident 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ESTJs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Sensing and Thinking preferences. 


B If they have not developed their Sensing, ESTJs may 
decide too quickly before taking in enough information. 
Then their decisions will reflect their previously formed 
judgments or biases. 

B If they have not developed their Thinking, they may not 
have a reliable way of evaluating information and thus 
end up making inconsistent or overly harsh decisions. 


If ESTJs do not find a place where they can use their gifts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually feel 
frustrated and may 


W Become rigid and dogmatic 

B Be intrusive, “know-it-all” experts, overpowering others 
and refusing to listen 

B Get picky about details and be impatient with those who 
do not follow procedures exactly 


It is natural for ESTJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Feeling and Intuitive parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Apply logic even when emotions and impacts on people 
need primary consideration 

B Fail to respond to others’ needs for intimate connection 
and processing of feelings 

BW Not always see the wider ramifications of a seemingly 
simple, direct action 


Under great stress, ESTJs may feel alone and unappreci- 
ated and be unable to communicate their feeling of distress 
and despair. 

Table +.36 summarizes relevant research results for 
ESTJs. Dominant extraverted Thinking types with auxiliary 
introverted Sensing present quite a different research picture 
from that of the ISTP dominant introverted Thinking types 
with auxiliary extraverted Sensing. The results show ESTJs 
to be contented, to be high on coping resources, and to have 
a positive outlook about themselves and the world. How- 
ever, some results that reflect stress-related behavior differen- 
tiate ESTJs from, for example, ESTPs, in that ESTJs are over- 
represented as coronary bypass patients, as showing Type A 
behavior, among men with chronic pain, and as high in the 
emotional exhaustion aspect of job burnout. It is interesting 
that they are overrepresented among men who have been 
married more than two times and also report high satisfac- 
tion with their current marriage or intimate relationship. 

Perhaps these somewhat mixed responses to stress are 
partially a function of some of the other research results 


Table 4.36 Research Describing EST] 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Overrepresented among men who had been married more than two times 
One of three least common types among males in substance abuse program 
Females underrepresented in a substance abuse program 


One of two male types underrepresented in a substance abuse program 


Understanding the 16 Types 89 


Contented, energetic, practical, prejudiced, self-satisfied! 
Males among the three highest on "Soundness" and “Efficacy”? 


3 
3 
3 

3 


Second most frequent among men who had undergone coronary bypass surgery* 


Overrepresented among those having Type A behavior’ 


Overrepresented among men with chronic pain4 


With ENFPs, had highest total coping resource scores of all the types* 


With ENT]s, had second-highest mean level of coping resources 


4 


Ranked first of all 16 types in using cognitive coping resources and second in using emotional and social 


coping resources* 


Ranked third highest on “Emotional exhaustion" burnout scale? 


Ranked fourth highest in “Positive affectivity" and lowest in “Negative affectivity”&gt; 





Education 


In national sample, ranked third most satisfied with “Marriage/intimate relationship”? 


———— —'—— —À —— 


t7 lan em men E -afe 


Females among three lowest on two out of two measures of creativity 


One of top two types among industrial/technical teachers" 


Among top four types in college GPA’ 


Most frequent type among school administrators 
One of two types most frequent among top 100 executive educators 
Overrepresented among top 100 executive educators 


7 
7 
8 


Frequently represented among college RAs’ 


Least likely of the types to report suicidal ideation in college" 


Among highest in college retention 


Highly represented among vocational teachers? 


In national sample “Leisure Activities,” overrepresented in “Playing sports" and “Watching sporting events,” 
underrepresented in “Listening to music" 


Performed lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Thinking types? 


Academic subjects preferred: math, practical skills? 


EM rt ilg i f a a DOCET Due - s mi te = 


shown in the education, career, and organization areas. ESTJs 
appear to be ambitious and hardworking, with high stan- 
dards of competence, personal responsibility, and conformity 
to clear and well-established structures. Their naturally dom- 
inant leadership style may contribute to their confidence in 
their abilities and optimism about successfully achieving 
their goals, with an accompanying likelihood of overdoing 
that can lead to physical and emotional stress reactions. 

The other ESTJ research results are in accord with the 
type characteristics we would expect to emerge from their 
dynamic focus on applying logical decisions to current data 
in the external environment. They are seen on the CPI 
scales as high on Dominance, Sociability, Social Presence, 
Self-Acceptance, Well-Being, Socialization, Self-Control, 
Tolerance, Good Impression, Communality, and Achieve- 
ment via Conformance—all qualities considered desirable 
in our society. They are lower on Achievement via Indepen- 
dence, Intellectual Efficiency, Psychological-Mindedness, 


Flexibility, and Femininity/Masculinity. As we shall see, 
several of these high and low scales are different for the 
EST) companion type, the ENTJs, who also have dominant 
extraverted Thinking. 

Overall, then, the data for ESTJs suggest that people of 
this type are seen quite positively in our culture and that 
their particular characteristics conform readily to a norma- 
tive notion of success and psychological adaptation. 


ENT]: Extraverted Thinking 
with Introverted Intuition 


The dynamics of ENT) are as follows: 
Dominant function: Tg 
Auxiliary function: Nj 
Tertiary function: 5j 


Fourth/inferior function: Fy 


90 Theory 


Table 4.36 Research Describing EST] continued 


Careers 


Most important features of an ideal job: "A stable and secure future 
Had highest score on retirement planning in a study of university faculty and staff planning to retire 


Overrepresented among bank officers and financial managers! 





0 
#10 
10 


Highest of all types in national sample in liking work environments with "Clear structures &amp; responsibilities” 
and “Working as part of a team"; one of three highest types favoring " Toeing the line" and "Going by the 
book,” and include “Variety of tasks” among top three desirable characteristics! ! 


In national sample "Organizational Values,” placed high value on "Achievement within system 


In national sample, among types most satisfied with their work and working conditions 


In national sample, dissatisfied with "Promotions" in their work! ! 


tp 446 


In national sample, among top four types in valuing "Health," “Financial security,’ “Achievement,” and 


"Prestige"! ! 


In national sample ranked highest in valuing “Financial security" (76.0%), "Achievement &amp; accomplishment" 
(69.2%), and "Prestige &amp; status" (14.3%)! 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample! ! 


Overrepresented among both male and female small business owners compared with national sample! ! 


Occupational trends identified: management, administration, law enforcement! 


batiment 


LU m z e 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management,Teams 


DHT em CIEE TT ONE AE me e e P DR ODES LE ADEA n Mr ket e e m De tra e te 





Higher on CPI scales Do, Sy, Sp, Sa, Wb, So, Sc, To, Gi, Cm, Ac; lower on Ai, le, Py, Fx, Fm? 


Higher on LSI scales Dogmatic, Impatient, Impulsive, Initiating, Manipulating, Pressuring!? 


Departures from SYMLOG Most Effective Profile: underemphasize "Active teamwork toward common 


55 64 


wt 41 *3 T) 


goals,’ "Efficiency, strong impartial management, "Equality," "Responsible idealism, collaborative work,” 


“Trust in the goodness of others"; seen as overemphasizing "Self-protection, self-interest first 


Most positive about using statistical methods as an information source 


"l4 
D 


Rated by employees as using an adaptation approach to creativity—the methodical and incremental 


approach to change? 


Showed change on at least four of the seven leadership items in Naval Academy leadership behavior 


study where type training was followed by feedback from lower-ranked students 
In a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict, tended to compete 


15 
l6 


) T * ma OM y ; . i 
Note: ^Bnef definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; !?Tables 4.26-4.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source ! Summary of salient ACL data and Q-Sort descriptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their ratings. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; “Highest three 
and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment ("Souudness" and “Elficacy”), which were calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, 
Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996, "Shelton, 1996; ?See Chapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”; "Highest three and lowest three types ou three measures of creativity, 
calculated separately for males and females. Thome &amp; Gough, 1991; /See Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education”; “DiTibeno, 1996; "Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; "Hammer, 
19962, ! See Chapter 12, "Uses of Type m Career Counseling”: ^A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15,102 people 


who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997: 


Results in the same study at the Center for Creative Leadership ou the 


Leadership Style Indicator (LSI); 144 study using SYMLOG analysis of 529 subjects from the top three tiers of management. Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 16 types were 
averaged across all raters. Sundstrom &amp; Busby, 1997; '?Walck, 1996; “Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996. 


At Their Best People with ENT] preferences are natural 
leaders and organization builders. They conceptualize and 
theorize readily and translate possibilities into plans to 
achieve short-term and long-term objectives. They readily 
see illogica] and inefficient procedures and feel a strong urge 
to correct them—to organize people and situations to get 
them moving in the right direction. 

ENT]Js are strategie visionaries, adept at planning for the 
future needs ol the people and organizations for which they 
arc responsible. 


Characteristics of ENTJs ENTJs use their Thinking 
primarily externally and are thus natural erities. They set 
their own standards and are forceful in applying them to 
others, to organizations, and to themselves. They value 
intelligence and competence and abhor inefficiency or 


ignorance. They ean be tough when the situation calls for 
toughness. ENTJs are likely to be 


BM Analytical, logical, and objectively critical 
W Decisive, clear, and assertive 


ENT]Js are intellectually curious, seek new ideas, and like 
complex problems. They use their Intuition primarily inter- 
nally to coneeive possibilities and ereate the insights they 
use in making decisions and plans. ENTJs are likely to be 


B Conceptual and global thinkers 
BW [innovative theorizers and planners 


ENTJs are usually excellent solvers of organizational 
problems. They are keenly aware of the intricate connee- 
tions within organizations and are action oriented and 
strategic—they think ahead, anticipate problems, devise 


broad plans and systems, and marshal human and material 
resources to achieve goals. They are generally disinterested 
in routine maintenance activities, prelerring new challenges. 


How Others May See Them ENT]s love, and are 
energized by, stimulating interactions with people. They 
often challenge people's statements and behaviors, ex- 
pecting that others will defend them and that, as a result, 
mutual learning will take place. ENTJs admire and seek out 
people who are knowledgeable and who stand up to them, 
say what they think, and argue persuasively. 

ENTJs prefer that things be settled and clear, but their 
love of ideas can pull them into wide-ranging Intuitive 
exploration and discussions. Their verbal fluency, decisive- 
ness, self-confidence, and urge to organize others can over- 
power people at times. Others usually see ENTJs as 


B Direct, challenging, and decisive 
B Objective, fair, and stimulating 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ENT]s in the development and ex- 
pression of their Intuitive and Thinking preferences. 


B If they have not developed their Intuition, ENTJs may 
make decisions too quickly without considering alterna- 
tives or exploring possibilities. In this case, their deci- 
siveness can become dictatorial. 

B If they have not developed their Thinking, they may not 
have a reliable way to evaluate their insights and make 
plans. Then their decision making will be inconsistent 
and changeable. 


If ENTJs do not find a place where they can use their 
gilts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually 
feel frustrated and may 


E Become overly impersonal and critical 
W Be intrusive and directive—giving orders without listening 
W Become abrasive and verbally aggressive 


It is natural for ENTJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Feeling and Sensing parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


E Fail to notice or value another's need for personal con- 
nection, appreciation, and praise 

B Fail to factor into their plans the needs of others for sup- 
port and processing time 

B Overlook specifics and realistic factors that are necessary 
to carry their plans to completion 


Under great stress, ENTJs can be overwhelmed by self- 
doubt, feel alone and unappreciated, and be unable to 
express their distress to others. 

Table 4.37 summarizes relevant research results for 
ENTJs. ENT] research results as displayed in Table 4.37 
show some general and specific similarities to the data for 
ESTJs, as well as quite a few differences that suggest the 
influence of the different auxiliary functions, Sensing and 
Intuition. It is quite interesting that there is no overlap in the 


Understanding the 16 Types — 91 





adjectives with which the two types are described, with 
ENTJs seen as ambitious, forceful, optimistic, aggressive, 
and egotistical and ESTJs described as contented, energetic, 
practical, prejudiced, and self-satished. (See Chapter 9 for a 
further discussion of the distinctive adjectives with which 
the types are described.) As is found for other types, ENTJs 
are overrepresented among college students referred for sub- 
stance abuse workshops but underrepresented in actual 
substance abuse treatment programs. It is interesting that 
ESTJs, while similarly uncommon in substance abuse 
groups, do not seem to be identified as at risk in college. 

ENTJs are ranked high in coping resources and low in 
reporting stress in several life areas, and unlike ESTJs, who 
report high job burnout through emotional exhaustion, 
ENTJs rank lowest on this variable and are similar to EST]s 
on positive and negative alfectivity. 

ENTJs show success in the educational sphere similar to 
that of ESTJs, though their academic interests are toward 
English and science, as compared with the EST] interest in 
math and practical skills. In career variables they show also 
some type-consistent differences from ESTJs, most notably 
in workplace values and satisfaction, which focus more on 
future-oriented and independent pursuits than appears to be 
the case for the ESTJs. Both types share satisfaction with 
their work and working conditions, and ENTJs are among 
those with the highest salaries. Both types also tend to 
deal with conflict by competing. 

Perhaps even more clearly than is the case for ESTJs, 
ENT] research results highlight what is valued, respected, 
and desired in our culture. Nevertheless, the data also 
suggest that some "negative" effects can accompany these 
highly regarded qualities. 


ISFP: Introverted Feeling 
with Extraverted Sensing 


Dominant function: F} 
Auxiliary function: Sg 
Tertiary function: Ng 


Fourth/inferior function: Tp 


At Their Best ISFPs live in the present with a quiet sense 
of joyfulness; they want time to experience each moment. 
They prize the freedom to follow their own course, have 
their own space, and set their own time frame, and they give 
the same freedom and tolerance to others. They are faithful 
in fulfilling obligations to people and things that arc 
important to them. 

ISFPs take time to develop intimacy with others, but, 
once they do, those relationships are very important. They 
express their devotion to ethers spontaneously in many 
quiet ways. 


Characteristics of ISFPs ISFPs are guided by a strong core 
of inner values and want their outer life to demonstrate 
those values. They want their work to be more than just a 
job; they want to contribute to people’s well-being or 


92 Theory 


Table 4.37 Research Describing ENT] 


Personality, Psychotherapy, 
Health, Stress, Coping 


Education 


Ambitious, forceful, optimistic, aggressive, egotistical! : 
Overrepresented among behavioral psychologists? 


Overrepresented among new college students referred for a substance abuse workshop? 


One of two types underrepresented among males in a substance abuse program? 


Underrepresented in female chemical dependency sample? 


Overrepresented among members of a cardiac rehabilitation program? 


With EST], had the second-highest mean level of coping resources? 


Ranked first of all 16 types in using physical coping resources? 


One of the four types in college reporting the highest levels of assertiveness? 


In national sample, lowest in reporting stress associated with "Work" and "Finances" * 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by “Trying to think of options"? 


In national sample, ranked second highest in "No" and fourth highest in “Not Sure" re:''Belief in higher 
spiritual power" 


In national sample, ranked lowest on "Emotional exhaustion" burnout scale? 


Ranked second highest in “Positive affectivity" and lowest in "Negative affectivity"? 


———Á — MD T more e e m emen nme ML DeL Rie tmt S er en Sr m e aD e De ED eam ems 


Males among three highest on one of three measures of creativity; females among three highest on one 
out of three measures of creativity? 


Most frequent among national CASE professor of the year finalists? 


Among top four types in college GPA 


One of two types most frequent among top |00 executive educators 
Overrepresented among top 100 executive educators 


6 
7 


One of two types most frequent among RAs at womens college 


Frequent among college students referred for substance abuse training 


Among highest in college retention 


Highest grades among persisters in college 


One of two types most frequent among female student affairs officers 


In national sample "Leisure Activities.” overrepresented in "Working ouUexercising"ó 


Performed lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Thinking types? 


Academic subjects preferred: English, science 


happiness. They dont enjoy routine but will work with 
energy and dedieation when doing something they believe 
in. ISFPs are likely to be 


@ Trusting, kind, and considerate 
@ Sensitive and gentle 


ISFPs are acutely aware of the specifies and realities of 
the present—the people and the world around them. They 
learn by doing more than by reading or hearing and get 
involved in day-to-day earetaking activities. ISFPs are likely 
to be 


B Observant 
@ Realistic, practical, conerete, and factual 


ISFPs are attuned to the feelings and needs of others and 
flexible in responding to them. They often have an affinity 
for nature and for beauty in all living things—people, 
plants, and animals. They prize most those who take time 


8 


Lee —— ——————— E T ten Rate n WEE Te Re aa ———— P NE A e Lr e A E 


to understand their values and goals and who support them 
in achieving those goals in their own way. 


How Others May See Them ISFPs are adaptable and 
flexible unless something that matters strongly to them is 
endangered; then they stop adapting. They care deeply 
about people but may show it through doing things for 
others more than through words. 

ISFPs tend to be quiet and unassuming, and their 
warmth, enthusiasm, and playful humor may not be appar- 
ent to people who don't know them well. They prefer to 
observe and support rather than organize situations; they 
have little wish to dominate. 

ISFPs may be underestimated by others and may also 
underrate themselves. They often take for granted what 
they do well and make too much of the contrast between 
their inner standards and their actual behavior and aceom- 
plishments. Others usually see ISFPs as 


Understanding the 16 Types 93 


Table 4.37 Research Describing ENT) continued 


Careers 


ae DEDNE T ate 


Organizations, Leadership, 
Management, Teams 


Highest of all types in national sample in liking work environments with "A variety of tasks,” "People with 
different backgrounds,” and “International opportunities"; lowest of all the types in liking work environments 
with "No expectation of extra hours" and “Toeing the line.” Include "Independence &amp; achievement" and 
“Clear structure” among top three desirable characteristics” 


In national sample, one of two types most satisfied with work, where they work, and future work 
opportunities, unlikely to leave job,and among those with highest income? 


In national sample “Organizational Values,” place high value on "Financial analysis" and low value on “Nurturing 
mene »9 
affiliation 


oF £4 


In national sample, among top four types valuing “Home/family,’ “Achievement,” "Creativity," and 
"Learning? 


Greatest work environment satisfiers are opportunities to use talents and to contribute to society, job 
security, opportunities for learning and for accomplishment? 


In national sample, ranked highest in valuing "Home/family'? 


Overrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample? 


Overrepresented among both male and female owners of small businesses compared with national 
sample? 
Occupational trends identified: management, leadership? 


Higher on CPI scales Do, Cs, Sy, Sp, Sa, Wb, Re, So, Em, To, Gi, Ac, Ai, le, Py, Fx, In; lower on Fm!° 
Higher on LSI scales Adaptable, Energetic, Fair, Impersonal, Independent, Initiating, Opinionated, Resourceful! ! 
Departures from SYMLOG Most Effective Profile: underemphasize "Active teamwork toward a common 


goal,” "Efficiency, strong impartial management,” "Having a good time,” "Protecting less able members,’ 


"Equality," "Collaborative work,” “Friendship,” "Trust in the goodness of others"; overemphasize 
"Self-protection, self-interest first” !? 


In a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict, tended to compete? 





Note: Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Orgamzations." See Table 4.26, !! Tables 4.26- 4.41 report ratings by 
subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on varions leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source; Summary of sahent ACL data and Q-Sort descriptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their raungs. Thome &amp; Gough, 1991, *Quenk &amp; Quenk, 
1996; "Shelton, 1996, *See C hapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”, ?Highest three and lowest three types on three measures of creativity, calculated separately 
for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; See Chapter 11, "Uses of Type in Education”; /DiTibeno, 1996; "Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, See Chapter 12, "Uses of Type in Career 
Counseling”; ^A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs at the 
Center for Creative Leadership Fleenor, 1997; ^" Results in the same study at the Center lor Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSD; p study using SYMLOG 
analysis of 529 subjects from the top three uers of management. Ratings of SYMLOG values for the 16 types were averaged across all raters. Sundstrom &amp; Busby, 1997; 13Hammer &amp; 


Huszczo, 1996. 





B Quiet, reserved, and private—hard to know well ® Withdraw from people and the situation 
8 Spontaneous and tolerant B Be excessively self-critical 
B Passively resist structures and rules 
Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances @ Feel unappreciated and undervalued 
have not supported ISFPs in the development and ex- | 
pression of their Sensing and Feeling preferences. [t is natural for ISFPs to give less attention to their non- 


preferred Thinking and Intuitive parts. If they neglect these 


B lf they have not developed their Sensing, ISFPs may have too much, however, they may 
no reliable way of getting accurate data about the external 
world or of actualizing their values. Their decisions will — 8 Reject or not take seriously logical systems 


be based on little information and be overly personal. m Feel ill-equipped to deal with complexity 
B If they have not developed their Feeling, they may get B Not always see the wider ramifications of their specific, 
caught up in Sensing realities and not take time to do the immediate decisions 


internal valuing process by which they make their best 
decisions. They may avoid decision making, allowing 
others or circumstances to decide for them. 


Under great stress, ISFPs can become uncharacteristi- 
cally critical of themselves and others, verbalizing harsh 
and negative judgments. 


If ISFPs do not find a place where they can use their gifts Table 4.38 summarizes relevant research results for 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually feel ISFPs. Insight into the meaning of the research results in 


frustrated and may 


Table 4.38 for ISFPs comes from the description of this 


94 Theory 


Table 4.38 Research Describing ISFP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Females among three highest on "Soundness" and among three lowest on "Efficacy" 


Health, Stress, Coping Among three male types most “oblivious” to partner's dissatisfaction with the relationship? 


Overrepresented among males in a substance abuse program? 


Third most frequent among female coronary heart disease patients? 


Males overrepresented among hypertensive patients? 


Ranked lSth of 16 types in using emotional coping resources and | 6th in using physical coping resources; 
ranked | Sth in total resources? 


One of the four types in college reporting the lowest levels of assertiveness? 


In national sample, highest in reporting stress associated with "Finances" and "Children"? 


» ae 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by "Trying to avoid stressful situations, 
angry and not showing it,’ “Sleeping,” and "Watching TV"4 


Getting upset or 


In national sample, ranked highest in "Ever had heart disease/hypertension"* 


Ranked highest on "Emotional exhaustion" and bur uL a burnout scales* 
Ranked dd guess in iesu affectivity"" 


p mem " Foe ee — —— —— À MÀ —— ol ———————————— 








m ote on aem T ee hA t m 5 n a e 





Education Males among three lowest on one out of three measures of creativity; females among three highest on 
one out of three measures of creativity and among three lowest on one out of two measures of creativity? 


Projected self fewest number of years into the future in essays 


Among lowest in college retention? 


Among highest persisters in college® 

In national sample “Leisure Activities,’ overrepresented in "Watching TV three or more hours per day" 
and "Watching TV for leisure"; underrepresented in “Reading,” "Working out/exercising;' “Writing,” 
“Appreciating art,” and "Taking classes, going to school’ 

Lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Feeling types’ 


jesus Lpg Jeme: Ip skills" 


bat ————— — ——— —————————————————— "————————————————————— 


Careers More likely to say they disliked their work, among bank officers and financial managers? 


Lowest of all types in national sample in liking work environments with "A variety of tasks"; one of three 
highest types in favoring “Loyalty &amp; security,’ "Making the job as simple as possible,’ and "No expectation 
of extra hours”; include among top three desirable work characteristics "Clear structure” and"'Independence 
&amp; achievement” !? 


In national sample, among those with lowest income and unlikely to leave job!® 


In national sample “Organizational Values,” placed high value on "Happy family" and low value on "Variety &amp; 
challenge" !? 


In national sample, greatest dissatisfiers were “Promotions,” “Job security,’ “Salary”! 


In national sample, ranked lowest in valuing "Achievement &amp; accomplishment,’ "Education &amp; learning," and 
"Being creative" !? 


Underrepresented among working MBA students compared to national sample!® 


Underrepresented among both male and female small business owners compared with national sample! 


RS trends Nasen health care, business, law enforcement ^ 


banal dura ae -—— ST e RTE Soe e TP ee Tu ee Ae atin em 7 eB fa a eet hd 7 ax dias 7 s C s te te o n Do dal a arnt — allai — — — tg a De i Ra OS ST I coe AAS 


Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scale Fm; lower on Do, Cs, Sy, Sp, Sa, Wb, Re, To, Gi, Ac, Ai, le, Py. In, Em'' 
Management, Teams Higher on LSI scale Easygoing!? 


In a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict, tended to avoid 
conflict!3 


7 : : Ss uty p : . OU e 24 ; 
Note: |'Bnel definitions of these CPI scales can he found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4 26; ^Tahles 4.26—4.41 report 
ratings by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


source: Highest three anc 1 lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment (“Soundness” and "Efficacy "), which were calculated separately for males and females. 
Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991, ^Qnenk &amp; Quenk, 1996: Shelton, 1996; *See € hapter 10, “Uses of Type in, Connseling and Psychotherapy" ; Highest three and lowest three types 
on three me: isures of crcauvity, calculated separately for males and females. Thome &amp; ken 1991, See C hapter 11, "Uses of Type in Edncation": "Difiberio, 1996; Myers &amp; 
McCaulley, 1985; "Hammer, 19962, sce Chi ipter 12, "Uses of Type in Career Counseling”, ^ A study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI 
using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership de DUC DUE at the Center for Creauve Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; V Results in the same sindy at the 

C enter for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSI); + "Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996. 


type as gentle, unassuming, loyal individuals who tend to 
minimize their own skills and accomplishments and prefer 
to be in a supportive rather than a leadership role. That 
females are among the three highest on the “Soundness” 
measure of adaptation and among the three lowest on the 
“Efficacy” measure makes sense when we consider ISFP 
qualities in relation to the indicative and contraindicative 
adjectives on these two adjustment measures (see Chapter 
10, Tables 10.1 and 10.2, and the accompanying discussion 
of type and gender biases apparent in these measures). 

In light of the makeup of ISFPs, it is not surprising that 
they are overrepresented in groups with apparent stress- 
related conditions, such as heart discase and hyperten- 
sion, and that they, like nearly all the Introverted types, 
appear in substance abuse groups as well. That ISFPs are 
quite low in overall coping resources and in using emo- 
tional and physical coping resources is to be expected for a 
type who by their very nature prefer to be in nonstressful 
situations. This observation is supported by their being 
highest in coping with stress by trying to avoid it, getting 
upset and not showing it, sleeping, and watching TV. The 
results for burnout measures and negative affectivity are 
also consistent with the ISFP desire for low-key situations. 

The education, career, and management results also 
make sense in this regard. ISFPs projected themselves the 
fewest number of years into the future. With their orienta- 
tion to concrete, straightforward experience and accom- 
plishment in the present, it is not surprising that the aca- 
demic environment may not be interesting, comfortable, 
and affirming for them. Similarly, few of todays work envi- 
ronments permit working steadily on a limited set of tasks, 
nor does the workplace in general reward loyalty and secu- 
rity, simplicity of tasks, and not working overtime. 

The CPI scales that show them as higher on Femininity/ 
Masculinity (reflecting being sympathetic, warm, modest, 
and dependent) and lower on Dominance, and various 
“social,” “self-image,” and “achievement” measures are also 
consistent with the natural approach of ISFPs. 

The interests, competencies, and contributions of ISFPs 
may not be readily recognized in a context that tends to value 
quite different interests and achievements. The fast-paced, 
rapidly changing workplace may be a particularly likely 
arena where the quiet persistence, compctence, resourceful- 
ness, and talents of ISFPs may go unseen and unrewarded. 


INFP: Introverted Feeling 
with Extraverted Intuition 


Dominant function: F} 
Auxiliary function: Nr 
Tertiary function: S 


Fourth/inferior function: Tẹ 


AtTheir Best People with INFP preferences have an inner 
core of values that guides their interactions and decisions. 
They want to be involved in work that contributes to both 


Understanding the 16 Types 95 





their own growth and inner development and those of 
others—to have a purpose beyond their paycheck. They 
make a priority of clarifying their values and living in 
congruence with them. 

INFPs recognize and honor the emotional and psycho- 
logical needs of others, even when others may not have rec- 
ognized or expressed their own needs. 


Characteristics of INFPs INFPs primarily use their 
Feeling preference internally where they make decisions 
based on their values ol self-understanding, individuality, 
and growth. Living by moral commitments to what they 
believe in is crucial to INFPs. They are likely to be 


B Sensitive, concerned, and caring 
B lIdealistic and loyal to their ideas 


INFPs enjoy reading, discussing, and reflecting on possi- 
bilities for positive change in the future. They are curious 
about ideas and quick to see connections and meanings. 
INFPs are likely to 


m Be curious and creative 
B Have long-range vision 


INFPs are usually fascinated by opportunities to explore 
the complexities of human personality—their own and oth- 
ers’. They tend to work in bursts of energy and are capable 
of great concentration and output when fully engaged ina 
project. They are generally faithful in fulfilling obligations 
related to people, work, or ideas to which they are commit- 
ted, but they can have difficulty performing routine work 
that has little meaning for them. 


How Others May See Them  INFPs find structures and 
rules confining and prefer to work autonomously. They are 
adaptable and flexible until something violates their inner 
values. Then they stop adapting. The resulting expression of 
value judgments can emerge with an intensity that is 
surprising to others. 

INFPs tend to be reserved and selective about sharing 
their most deeply held values and feelings. They value rela- 
tionships based on depth, authenticity, true connection, 
and mutual growth. INFPs prize most those who take time 
to understand their values and goals. Others usually see 
INFPs as 


B Sensitive, introspective, and complex 
m Original and individual 
m Sometimes difficult to understand 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported INFPs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Intuitive and Feeling preferences. 


m If they have not developed their Intuition, INFPs may 
not have reliable ways to take in information and may 
fail to notice the realities of situations. Then they make 
decisions based solely on personal values and find it dif- 
ficult to translate their values into action. 


96 Theory 


B If they have not developed their Feeling, they may not 
take time for the inner valuing process by which they 
make their best decisions, instead going from one excit- 
ing possibility to another and achieving little. 


If INFPs do not find a place where they can use their 
gifts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually 
feel frustrated and may 


8 Have uncharacteristic difficulty expressing themselves 
vetbally 

B Withdraw from people and situations 

S Not give enough information to others, especially about 
important values 


It is natural for INFPs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Thinking and Sensing parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Become easily discouraged about the contrast between 
their ideals and accomplishments 

8 Reject logical reasoning even in situations that require it, 
asserting the supremacy of their internal viewpoint 

8 Be impractical and have difficulty estimating the resources 
required to reach a desired goal 


Under great stress, INFPs may begin seriously doubting 
their own competence and that of others, becoming overly 
critical and judgmental. 

Table 4.39 summarizes relevant research results for 
INFPs. Several of the research results reported for ISFPs 
appear for the companion dominant introverted Feeling 
types, the INFPs. Males are overrepresented in several sub- 
stance abuse studies. INFPs in general tend to be low in 
assertiveness and positive affectivity, while being the high- 
est type on the negative affectivity scale. They appear infre- 
quently as working MBA students and as owners of small 
businesses, have an easygoing leadership style like the 
ISFPs, and tend to avoid conflict when presented with it. 

A number of dissimilarities to ISFPs are also evident in 
comparing Tables +.39 and 4.38. Though ISFP males were 
not very high or low on the “Soundness” and “Efficacy” 
(they were fourth lowest on “Efficacy”) adaptation mea- 
sures, INFP males were the lowest on both of these mea- 
sures. INFP males also showed the highest levels of depres- 
sion and high levels of anger and frustration with chronic 
pain, although they were underrepresented as chronie pain 
patients. They also were second lowest in reporting having 
heart disease or hypertension, perhaps suggesting some 
selectivity of this type in their stress-related responses. 

As a type typically seen as serious, contemplative, and 
with high ideals, it is not surprising that they are the most 
likely to report suicidal thoughts in college. In contrast to 
ISFP college students, and no doubt related to their auxil- 
iary Intuition preference, INFPs’ use of leisure time is over- 
represented in activities such as writing, appreciating art, 
reading, and listening to music. INFP career interests and 


values are also different from those of ISFPs. Creativity is 
the most important feature of an ideal job, and they are 
among the three highest in wanting independence and 
achievement in their work, as well as autonomy. These 
career characteristics may not be readily available to them, 
in that they, like INTPs, report the most dissatisfaction 
with most aspects of their jobs and report the intention of 
lcaving these jobs. 

INFPs are higher on the CPI scales Achievement via Inde- 
pendence and Flexibility, and like the ISFPs they are higher 
on Femininity/Masculinity and lower on Dominance, Socia- 
bility, Social Presence, Self-Acceptance, Well-Being, Good 
Impression, and Achievement via Conformity. Unlike the 
ISFPs, they are also lower on Socialization, Self-Control, and 
Communality and are not lower on Intellectual Efficiency, 
Psychological-Mindedness, Independence, and Empathy. 

These differences, as well as those relating to educational 
interests, pinpoint some of the reasons that INFPs may be 
more readily recognized and appreciated by others than is 
the case for ISFPs and that may contribute to their more 
mixed responses to life stresses. Nevertheless, the aspects of 
living and ways of succeeding that give meaning and satis- 
faction to INFPs are not necessarily reflected in the kinds of 
variables shown in Table 4.39. The same appears true for 
[SFPs and some of the other types whose natural qualities 
may be somewhat divergent from those of the larger culture. 


ESF]: Extraverted Feeling 
with Introverted Sensing 


Dominant function: Fg 
Auxiliary function: Sı 
Tertiary function: Nj 


Fourth/inferior function: T; 


At Their Best People with ESFJ preferences like to or- 
ganize people and situations and then work with others to 
complete tasks accurately and on time. They are consci- 
entious and loyal, following through even in small matters, 
and they want others to be the same. They value security 
and stability. 

Sociable and outgoing, ESEJs enjoy celebrations and tra- 
ditions and bring a very personal caring to the workplace 
and home. They want to be appreciated for themselves and 
for what they give to others. 


Characteristics of ESF|s ESFJs usc their Feeling primarily 
externally and radiate warmth and energy. They are 
encouraged by approval and hurt by indifference or un- 
kindness. Conflict-filled or tense situations make them 
uncomfortable, and they work to ensure these dont occur. 
ESFJs are likely to be 


8 Warm, sympathetic, and helpful 
m Personable, cooperative, and tactful 


Understanding the 16 Types 97 


Table 4.39 Research Describing INFP 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Artistic, reflective, sensitive, careless, lazy! 
Health, Stress, Coping Males were lowest on both “Soundness” and “Efficacy”? 


Overrepresented among a sample of male therapists? 


Males likely to be overrepresented among substance abusers? 


Overrepresented among female substance abusers? 


Males one of four types most common in a substance abuse program? 


One of three types overrepresented among males in a substance abuse program? 


Underrepresented among men with chronic pain* 


Showed the highest level of depression of the 16 types with chronic pain? 


Reported second-highest level of anger and frustration among those suffering long-term pain* 


One of the four types in college reporting the lowest levels of assertiveness? 


In national sample, ranked second lowest in "Ever had heart disease/hypertension"? 


Ranked third lowest in “Positive affectivity” and highest in "Negative affectivity"? 











In national sample, ranked second highest in dissatisfaction with "Marriage/intimate relationship"? 


arietem e iie e mne emn n Mtr ee one ME a et = = — — z—— = . -= 


Education Have a general advantage in foreign language learning 
Most likely of the types to report suicidal thoughts in college? 
One of two types most frequent among college alcohol policy violators® 


LART 


In national sample “Leisure Activities," overrepresented in “Writing,” “Appreciating art,’ “Reading,” and 
"Listening to music" ó 


Performed significantly lower on deductive reasoning/ 
Academic subjects preferred: art, English, music? 


Careers Most important features of an ideal job: creativity and originality? 


Among three highest types favoring work environments with "Independence &amp; achievement,’ and include 
among top three desirable characteristics "Variety of tasks" and "Clear structure"!? 


In national sample, with INTPs, were dissatisfied with the kind of work they do, where they work, and 
future work opportunities, and were likely to leave the job!? 


In national sample “Organizational Values.” placed high value on “Nurturing affiliation”! 


In national sample, among top four types valuing “Autonomy” and “Creativity”! 


In national sample, greatest dissatisfiers in the work environment were "Promotions; “Amount of stress,” 
and "Opportunities for accomplishment"!? 


Underrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample? 


Underrepresented among both male and female small business owners compared with national 
sample!? 


Occupational trends identified: counseling, writing, arts! 


0 AE Sea oe te ————  "—————————————PP—PP(————————————————————————————————s————— "E P IURE 





Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scales Ai, Fx, Fm; lower on Do, Sy, Sp, Sa, Vb, So, Sc, Gi, Cm, Ac!! 
Management, Teams Higher on LSI scales Appreciative, Easygoing!? 


Showed change on at least four of the seven leadership items in Naval Academy leadership behavior 
study where type training was followed by feedback from lower-ranked students"? 


Tended to avoid conflict in a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict!* 
a Oe ee NCC TU NC ET A YTUPGOAVECETCIESNMUNR a 'UGIOEUCU"HECEL- D "ob DV IU. 000000 COTIZEDCD O03 1 ee 


7 ; : “yy : . LL d : 2 d+. 
Note: |! Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; 12 Tables +.26-4.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source’ I cummary of sahent ACL data and Q-Sort descnptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their ratings Thome &amp; Gough, 1991, ʻi highest 
three and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment (“Soundness” and “Efficacy”), which were calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 
1991, ^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; "Shelton, 1996; ?See Chapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy"; PSee Chapter 11, "Uses of Type in Education"; / DiTiberio, 
1996; "Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; “Hammer, 19962; “See C hapter 12," Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; ITA study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the 
scales of the CPI using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; 12 Results in the same 
study at the Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSD; “Walck, 1996, *Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996 


98 Theory 


ESFJs focus on the present and base decisions on experi- 
ence and facts. Though they enjoy variety, they adapt well 
to routine and don't like work that demands mastery of 
abstract ideas or impersonal analysis. They enjoy their pos- 
sessions and take good care of them. ESFJs are likely to be 


B Practical, realistic, and down-to-earth 
B Decisive, thorough, and consistent 


ESFJs are sensitive to the needs of each individual in 
their environment and good at providing practical caring. 
Much of their pleasure and satisfaction comes from the 
comfort and pleasure of others. 


How Others May See Them ESFjs are energized by 
interaction with others and genuinely interested in others’ 
lives and concerns. They feel most comfortable in 
structured situations and enjoy creating order, structure, 
and schedules. They prefer to do things the traditional and 
accepted way. 

For the sake of harmony, ESFJs will agree with others 
when they can. However, they also have strong values, 
which they express clearly and confidently when they think 
it is appropriate. 

ESFjs value family and social ties. They enjoy belonging 
and are good at celebrations and traditions. Others usually 
Sec Esti isas 


BW Sociable, outgoing, enthusiastic, and energetic 
W Organized and orderly 
B Committed to preserving traditions 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ESFJs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Sensing and Feeling preferences. 


B if they have not developed their Sensing, ESFJs may not 
take in much information before making decisions and 
jump to conclusions before fully understanding a situa- 
tion. They may then impose those decisions on everyone 
around them. 

B if they have not developed their Feeling, they may be 
tentative and uncertain, accepting the judgments of oth- 
ers too quickly 


Il ESEJs do not find a place where they can use their gifts 
and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually fecl 
frustrated and may 


W Doubt themselves and focus their attention entirely on 
satisfying the needs of others 

W Worry and feel guilty 

@ Become controlling in their push for harmony— "we will 
all get along" 

W Become overly sensitive, imagining slights where none 
were intended 


[t is natural for ESFJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Thinking and Intuitive parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Find it difficult to acknowledge and deal with the truth 
of problems with people or things they care about 

B Support those in charge or the standard procedures too 
uncritically 

B Fail to see wider possibilities or alternative ways of doing 
things 


Under great stress, ESFJs may find themselves uncharac- 
teristically critical of others and of themselves. Their nega- 
tive thoughts and opinions then trouble them greatly. 

Table 4.40 summarizes rclevant research results for ESFJs. 
ESFJs, in contrast to ISFPs, have dominant extraverted Feel- 
ing with auxiliary introverted Sensing rather than dominant 
introverted Feeling with auxiliary extraverted Sensing. This 
difference in dynamics leads to some striking differences, 
most notably in the way ESFJs are seen relative to psycho- 
logical adaptation (males being among the highest on 
“Soundness” and females among the highest on both 
"Soundness" [on which female ISFPs were also high] and 
"Efficacy" [where ISFP females were among the lowest]). 
ESFJs are underrepresented in substance abuse groups, and 
unlike many other types they were also underrepresented 
among new college students referred to a substance abuse 
workshop. Apparently ESF] behavior does not raise sub- 
stance abuse concerns among college officials. 

It is curious that one study found males to be underrep- 
resented among men at risk for heart attacks, while 
another study found women to be the most frequent type 
with coronary heart disease. Replication and further study 
of this possible gender difference is called for, especially in 
light of the other results that suggest that ESFJs have a high 
mean level of coping resources, rank highly in using spiri- 
tual/philosophical resources, and are highest in coping with 
stress by relying on religion and by talking to someone else. 
They were second highest in believing in a higher spiritual 
power and highest in indicating satisfaction with their mar- 
riage or intimate relationship. 

ESFJs seem to find environments with expectations of 
“toeing the line” a comfortable place to work. They are 
attracted to careers in education, health care, and religion, 
this latter a frequent way of coping with life stress as well. It 
is interesting that ESF} desires for clear structure, loyalty, 
security, and making the job simple may more likely be met 
in the context of their other ESFJ qualities. ISFPs, who 
express the same values, may not have the same helpful 
context to help meet these desires. Perhaps as a result, 
ESF]s appear quite satisfied with many aspects of their 
work and do not intend to leave their jobs. Important val- 
ues for ESFJs are “Health” and “Religion or spirituality,” 
while they were found lowest in valuing “Autonomy, frec- 
dom, and independence.” 


Understanding the 16 Types 99 


Table 4.40 Research Describing ESF} 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Males among three highest on“Soundness”’; females among three highest on "Soundness" and "Efficacy"! 
Health, Stress, Coping Underrepresented among female substance abusers? 


Underrepresented among new college students referred for a substance abuse workshop? 


Males one of the three least common types in a substance abuse program? 


Underrepresented among females in a substance abuse program? 


Underrepresented among men at risk for heart attack? 


Most frequent type among women with coronary heart disease? 


With ENFJs, had the third-highest mean level of coping resources? 


With ENFJs, appeared to be at the lowest risk for setbacks due to overdoing among those with 
long-term pain? 


Ranked second in using spiritual/philosophical coping resources? 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by "Talking to someone close" and “Relying on religious 
beliefs" 


In national sample, ranked second highest in believing in higher spiritual power* 


In national sample, ranked highest in satisfaction with “Marriage/intimate relationship"? 


ew ——9——————— 9c ^ -— A M án ee RRO -——— -= A rama - ~ acm MÀ ——Ó À— M M X P9 — — n E A 








Education Males among three lowest on two out of three measures of creativity? 


Most frequent type among education majors? 


Among highest in college retention® 


Most frequent among high school officers in health occupations association® 


In national sample “Leisure Activities,” underrepresented in “Writing? 


Lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Feeling types’ 
Academic subjects preferred: math, music® 


tet ee ————- " " — mM HÀ e t mets - em - —— Rx ——— $s -ADDE tet 


Careers Had highest satisfaction with co-workers in career satisfaction study? 
Most important features of an ideal job: service to others? 


Highest of all types in national sample in liking work environments with "Toe the line expectations"; 
among three highest types favoring "Clear structure,” “Loyalty and security,” and "Making the job as simple 
as possible”! 


In national sample, among those most satisfied with their work and where they work, and unlikely to leave! ? 


** 64 


In national sample "Organizational Values,” place high value on "Happy family,” "Outgoing affiliation,’ and 
"Business sociability’ !0 


39 4146 


In national sample, among top four types valuing “Home/family,” “Health,” “Friendships,” "Financial 
security,” “Spirituality,” "Community service,” and "Prestige" !O 


In national sample, greatest work environment satisfiers were "People | work with,’ "Amount of 
710 


wo ak 


responsibility,’ “Opportunity for societal contribution 


In national sample, ranked highest in valuing “Health” and “Religion or spirituality” and lowest in valuing 
“Autonomy, freedom, independence” !® 


Underrepresented among working MBA students compared with national sample’? 


Occupational trends identified: education, health care, religion 1 


MÀ —— MÀ ——À A s ——— ———— ——— ———————————— oaa a a 





Organizations, Leadership, ^ Higher on CPI scales Sy, So, Cm, Ac, Fm; lower on Ai, le, Py, Fx, In! ! 
Management, Teams Higher on LSI scales Changeable, Energetic, Forceful, Initiating, Resourceful!? 


In a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflict, tended to collaborate!? 


el a a Oe ee a eee ee a ee 


Note: !! Brief definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, "Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; 1 Tables +.26-+.41 report ratings 
by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


Source: ! Highest three and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment ("Soundness" and "Efficacy ), which were calculated separately for males and females. 
[horne &amp; Gough, 1991; ^Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996; ^Shelton, 1996; "See Chapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy”, ?Highest three and lowest three types 

on three measures of creativity, calculated separately for males and females. Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991; See Chapter 11, "Uses of Typem Education"; /DiTiherio, 1996, "Myers &amp; 
MeCaulley, 1985; "Hammer, 1996a; “See Chapter 12, “Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; ^A study that compared the mean scores ol the 16 types on the scales of the CPI 
using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leadership development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership. Fleenor, 1997; "Results in the same study at the Center 
for Creauve Leadership on the Leadership Style Indicator (LSI); l Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996 


100 Theory 





CPI data for ESFJs show them higher on Sociability, 
Socialization, Communality, Achievement via Conformity, 
and Femininity/Masculinity and lower on Achievement 
via Independence, Intellectual Efficiency, Psychological- 
Mindedness, Flexibility, and Independence—all results that 
make sense given the natural approach of ESEJs. They are 
higher on leadership scales of Changeable, Energetic, 
Forceful, Initiating, and Resourceful, in contrast to the sin- 
gle leadership scale Easygoing that was reported for ISFPs. 
ESFJs tend to collaborate in dealing with conflict. 

The data suggest that ESFJs embody qualities that are in 
general highly respected and valued in our culture. This 
may contribute to their standing on the various stress indi- 
cators shown, as well as in their general satisfaction with 
many aspects of their lives. 


ENF]: Extraverted Feeling 
with Introverted Intuition 


Dominant function: Fg 
Auxiliary function: Nj 
Tertiary function: Sı 


Fourth/inferior function: T; 


At Their Best People with ENF] preferences are highly 
attuned to others, using empathy to quickly understand 
emotional needs, motivations, and concerns. Their focus is 
on supporting others and encouraging their growth. 

ENEIJs are friendly persuaders who can often build con- 
sensus among people whose interests and motives are quite 
diverse. They often act as catalysts, including everyone and 
drawing out the best in others. They can be inspiring lead- 
ers as well as loyal followers. 


Characteristics of ENFJs ENFJs base decisions on 
personal values. They use their Feeling primarily externally, 
radiating warmth and energy. They look for and find the 
best in others and prize harmony and cooperation. They are 
warmed by approval, responding with energy and devotion, 
and especially sensitive to criticism or tensions. ENFJs are 
likely to be 


B Warm, compassionate, and supportive 
B Loyal and trustworthy 


ENFJs see meanings and connections and can be very 
insightful about others. They are curious about new ideas 
and stimulated by possibilities for contributing to the good 
of humanity. ENF]s are likely to 


B Be imaginative and creative 
W [ike variety and new challenges 


ENFJs naturally see the potential for growth in others 
and devote energy to help others achieve it. They are sensi- 
tive facilitators. ENFJs take responsibility to organize inter- 
actions of colleagues, friends, or family so that all are 
involved, harmony prevails, and people have fun. 


How Others May See Them ENFJs are energetic, 
enthusiastic, and very aware of others. Their genuine in- 
terest can usually draw out and involve even the most re- 
served person. They listen to and support others but also 
have very definite values and opinions of their own, which 
they will express clearly. ENFJs are energized by people and 
are socially adept; however, thev also have a strong need for 
authentic, intimate relationships. They bring great 
enthusiasm and intensity to creating and maintaining these. 

ENE]Js like their lives to be organized and will work to 
bring closure to ambiguous relationships or situations. 
However, if peoples needs conflict with schedules and 
rules, they will put people first. Others usually see ENFJs as 


B Sociable, personable, congenial, and gracious 
WB Expressive, responsive, and persuasive 


Potential Areas for Growth Sometimes life circumstances 
have not supported ENFJs in the development and ex- 
pression of their Intuitive and Feeling preferences. 


B If they have not developed their Intuition, ENFJs may 
not see possibilities, making decisions too quickly with- 
out taking in enough information or considering factors 
beyond their own personal values. 

m i they have not developed their Feeling, their decisions 
may be inconsistent and poorly formulated. They may 
then accept the judgments of others too readily. 


If ENFJs do not find a place where they can use their 
gifts and be appreciated for their contributions, they usually 
feel frustrated and may 


W Worry, feel guilty, and doubt themselves 

B Become insistent and controlling in their desire for har- 
mony 

B Be overly sensitive to criticism, real or imagined 


It is natural for ENFJs to give less attention to their non- 
preferred Thinking and Sensing parts. If they neglect these 
too much, however, they may 


B Make decisions based solely on personal values when 
logic is needed also 

@ Find it difficult to admit to problems or disagreements 
with people they care about 

B Overlook details required to realize their ideals 


Under great stress, ENFJs may find themselves suddenly 
and uncharacteristically critical and fault-finding with oth- 
crs. They generally kcep these negative opinions to them- 
selves, but they find such thoughts troubling and upsetting. 

Table 4.41 summarizes relevant research results for ENFJs. 
Like ESFJs, ENFJs seem to be well in accord with societal 
values and expectations. Male ENFJs are among the highest 
on the "Efficacy" measure of adaptation rather than the 
"Soundness" measure observed for ESF] males, and females 
are similar to ESF] females in being high on both measures. 


Understanding the 16 Types 101 


a e —M— — 





Table 4.41 Research Describing ENF] 


Personality, Psychotherapy, Active, pleasant, sociable, demanding, impatient! 


Health, Stress, Coping Males among three highest on “Efficacy”; females among three highest on "Soundness" and "Efficacy"? 


With ESFjs, had the third-highest mean level of coping resources? 

With ESF|s, appeared to be at the lowest risk for setbacks due to overdoing among those with long-term 
pain 

Highest ranks on coping resources used were social and cognitive (ranked third on both among the 16 


types); ranked third in total resources of the 16 types? 


One of the four types in college reporting the highest levels of assertiveness? 


In national sample, highest in coping with stress by "Exercising"* 

In national sample, ranked highest in “Belief in a higher spiritual power"? 

Ranked fourth lowest on "Depersonalization" burnout scale? 

Ranked third highest in "Positive affectivity" and second lowest in "Negative affectivity"* 


m AEn ə eS te mm ham — — —— — -— po E cag Um iH M —— M — np Pata m nag etit = 








ee 


Education Females among three highest on one out of two measures of creativity? 
Rated by psychologists among two types least likely to have trouble in school? 
Frequently represented among college RAs$ 


Most frequent type in ten-year study of college RAs® 


Among lowest in college retention 


** 44 


In national sample “Leisure Activities,” overrepresented in “Appreciating art,” "Writing, "Listening to 
music,” and "Reading"; underrepresented in "Watching TV three hours or more per day" $ 


Performed lower on deductive reasoning, with other dominant Feeling types? 
Academic subjects preferred: art, English, music? 


po——— €————— v— "A 





Career Most important features of an ideal job: "Use of my special abilities”? 


Among three highest types in national sample liking work environments with “Variety of tasks,’ "Teamwork; 
and "People from different backgrounds"; include in three most desirable characteristics "Independence 
&amp; achievement"? 


In national sample, were among those most satisfied with their work and where they work, but likely to leave 
the job!° 


In national sample “Organizational Values,” placed high value on “Nurturing affiliation” !® 


Po 4€ ** 46 


In national sample, among top four types valuing “Friendships,” "Learning," “Creativity,” and "Community 
service” |? 

In national sample, greatest work environment satisfiers are “People | work with,’ “Opportunities to use 
talents,” "Opportunity to learn,” “Job security,” "Amount of responsibility,’ and "Opportunity for societal 
contribution”; greatest dissatisfiers were “Promotions” and “Salary”!® 


In national sample, ranked highest in valuing “Education, learning” and "Community service"!? 


Occupational trends identified: religion, arts!° 
Organizations, Leadership, Higher on CPI scales Do, Cs, Sy, Sp, Sa, Re, To, Gi, Ac, Ai, le, Py, Fx, Em; lower on none! ! 


Management, Teams 12 


Higher on LSI scales Appreciative, Compromising, Delegating, Energetic, Fair, Resourceful, Supportive 
Tended to collaborate in a study of the influence of type dynamics on ways of dealing with conflicc!? 





Note: !!Bnef definitions of these CPI scales can be found in Chapter 13, "Uses of Type in Organizations.” See Table 4.26; !7Tables 4.26-4.41 report ratings 


by subordinates of types that were significantly higher or lower on various leadership scales, relative to the other types. 


l Summary of sahent ACL data and Q-Sort descriptions of 12 of the 16 types. Raters were naive to type when making their raungs Thome &amp; Gough, 1991, “Highest three 


and lowest three types on two measures of personal adjustment ("Soundness" and “Efficacy”), which were calculated separately for males and females. Thome &amp; Gough, 1991; 
Shelton, 1996; "See Chapter 10, "Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy"; "Highest three and lowest three types on three measures of creauvity, calculated separately 

for males and females Thorne &amp; Gough. 1991; See Chapter 11, "Uses of Type in Education”; ^ DiTiberio, 1996; Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; Hammer, 19963, !9See Chapter 12, 

"Uses of Type in Career Counseling”; lA study that compared the mean scores of the 16 types on the scales of the CPI using a sample of 15,102 people who attended leader 

ship development programs at the Center for Creative Leadership Fleenor, 1997, “Results in the same study at the Center for Creative Leadership on the Leadership Style 

Indicator (LSI), “Hammer &amp; Huszczo, 1996 


Sour E 


102 Theory 


ENFJs are highest in using social and cognitive coping 
resources and are similar to ESFJs in being high on coping 
resources in general. They, too, value religion and spirituality 
and are the highest in belief in a higher spiritual power. 

Many additional qualities and differences from ESF]Js are 
also apparent. ENFJs are low on the "Depersonalization" 
burnout scale, are high in positive affectivity, and are low in 
negative affectivity. In addition, females are high on one 
measure of creativity and are seen as least likely to have trou- 
ble in school. Leisure activities that show overrepresentation 
reflect artistic and intellectual interests, especially in liking 
writing, in which ESFJs were underrepresented. 

Career and organizational results reflect a liking for vari- 
ety in both tasks and pcople. They value friendships, learn- 
ing, creativity, and community service and are among the 
types most satisfied with their work and where they work. 
It is therefore interesting that they also report an intention 
to leave their jobs. 

ENFJs are similar to ESFJs on the CPI scales Sociability 
and Achievement via Conformance. They are reported as 
higher on Dominance, Capacity for Status, Social Presence, 
Self-Acceptance, Responsibility, Tolerance, Good Impres- 
sion, Achievement via Independence, Intellectual Efficiency, 
Psychological-Mindedness, Flexibility, and Empathy. They 
are not lower on any CPI scales, unlike ESFJs, who are lower 
on four of the five on which ENFJs are higher. ENFJ leader- 
ship variables differ from those of ESF]s except in being sim- 
ilarly high on Energetic and Resourceful measures. ENFJs 
are higher on Changeable, Forceful, and Initiating, as com- 
pared with the ESF] high standing on Appreciative, Compro- 
mising, Delegating, Fair, and Supportive. Like ESFJs, how- 
ever, ENFJs tend to compromise in conflict situations. 

ENFJs appear from these research data to have many of 
the people-oriented, cooperative qualities of ESFJs but also 
appear to enjoy more future-oriented, broad ranging inter- 
ests that make them seem more ambitious and individualis- 
tic in their approach. In contrast to INFPs, whose dominant 
Feeling function is introverted and whose auxiliary Intuition 
is extraverted, ENFJs have desires, competencies, and satis- 
factions that appear to conform well to what is recognized 
and valued in the larger culture. 


Conclusion 


The foregoing descriptions and supporting research show 
how particular patterns that appear in the type table and the 
16 types themselves can be studied and interpreted. The 
descriptions of two-letter combinations and whole types 
contained in this chapter are not exhaustive but aim to pro- 
vide the essential features that make preference combina- 
tions and types recognizable and meaningful. 


Research results in particular should be viewed as sug- 
gestive rather than definitive. The discussions of each 
research table sometimes include suggestions about the 
rationale for and implications of research results. It is 
important to view these suggestions as hypotheses that 
require careful empirical research and observation. ft is 
equally important to be cautious in generalizing any of the 
research results to individuals of anv type, especially in 
overinterpreting both "positive"-seeming and “negative”- 
appearing characteristics. Bear in mind that many of the 
variables that appear in these research tables are traits with 
explicit or implicit positive or negative values associated 
with particular scores. For example, it is clearly “better” to 
be higher on measures of adaptation than lower, better to be 
low on the various stress indicators than to be high, better 
to have many coping resources than few, better to be *cre- 
ative," obtain high grades, be socially at ease and achieve- 
ment oriented, and so on. 

Readers may have noted that although single prefer- 
ences and/or combinations of preferences may account for 
some of the effects reported for each type, the unique com- 
bination of effects shown, even given the reporting con- 
straints listed earlier, can best be understood within the 
context of the dynamic whole type. Practitioners and 
researchers may find it intriguing that some types who 
share the same dominant function in the same attitude 
show quite similar research results, while for others the 
different auxiliary functions appear to produce marked dif- 
ferences. If this is not an artifact resulting from the particu- 
lar variables reviewed, it implies even greater complexity 
and uniqueness to the type system for describing and 
explaining personality. 

Practitioners and researchers might also take note of the 
observation made in the discussion of ISTPs, where it was 
suggested that the same behavior can be motivated differ- 
ently for different types, and that each type may fulfill the 
same needs and desires through quite different behaviors. It 
is useful to take this into account when trying to under- 
stand type similarities and differences. 

One important result of presenting descriptions of the 
type combinations and types together with observational 
and research data is that it highlights the fact that for type 
theory and the MBTI, the whole is greater than the sum of 
the parts. Researchers can thus be further encouraged to 
study whole types and type dynamic groupings to yield 
meaningful and useful results. The conjunction of theory, 
observational data, and research evidence provides a unique 
opportunity to look at the breadth and depth of type influ- 
ences in many areas of human functioning. This approach 
to type knowledge also affirms the reality of psychological 
types as dynamic wholes that have an important unifying 
impact on our individual personalities. 


Administration 
and Interpretation Il 


he two chapters in Part IIl represent Myers and 

Briggs overriding reason for developing the 
MBTI—the desire to make psychological type theory use- 
ful in the lives of individuals and groups. Administering 
the instrument as recommended and learning to interpret 
it in the ways intended by its authors are essential to using 
psychological type for the benefit of the individuals who 
answer the questionnaire. 


Chapter 5, “Administering the MBTI,” covers everything 
that users need to attend to at this critical entry point into 
the process of providing type results to clients. It covers the 
who, what, and how of administration by discussing which 
groups of people are appropriate respondents to the Indica- 
tor, how to decide which form of the instrument serves par- 
ticular purposes, and how to ensure that respondents are 
free to indicate their preferences most accurately. As you 
read Chapter 5, you will become aware of the following: 


w Type theory leads us to expect young people to be less 
clear than older people in their preferences. 

m Translating the MBTI into other languages is a lengthy 
and arduous task. 

w Careful adherence to administration guidelines can fore- 
stall possible misuses of type results. 

w There may be special issues associated with administer- 
ing the MBTI in dillerent settings. 

gm The MBTI can be administered in several ways, includ- 
ing on-line administration. 


Chapter 6, "Interpreting Results of the MBII and Verily- 
ing Type,” gives readers both general guidelines and specific 
recommendations for the most effective ways of explaining 


104 = Administration and Interpretation 





type to individuals and groups. In a very real way, all of the 
information in the manual is in support of accurate inter- 
pretations that focus on the value of the MBTI to the 
client. A major portion of the chapter is devoted to a dis- 
cussion of ways in which practitioners can help clients 
verify their type so that it can become beneficial to them 
in their everyday lives. As you rcad Chapter 6, you will 
become aware of the following: 


BW There are important distinctions between “reported type,” 
“best-fit type,” and “true type.” 

B The percentage of people who agree with their reported 
type tends to vary depending on the group being studied 
and the methodology that is used. 

B [t is important to allow people to self-assess their type 
before providing them with MBTI results. 

B It is important to include some basic information about 
type dynamics and development in every interpretation 
session. 


B Respondents should be made aware that the MBTI sorts 
people into qualitatively different categories rather than 
measuring how much ol some trait they have. 


Readers of Chapter 6 should be particularly attentive to the 
recommended language for explaining type to clients. The 
language guidelines used throughout the manual are designed 
to discourage the use ol jargonlike terms that negatively affect 
the credibility and professional purposes of the MBTI. The 
use of certain shorthand terms also encourages stercotyping 
and a “nothing-but” interpretation of type and type prefer- 
ences. For example, referring to a person who prefers Feeling 
as a “Feeler” can be seen to imply that the person exclusively 
“feels” and never “thinks.” Use of such a term also increases 
the likelihood that the hearer wil! misinterpret “Feeler” as 
meaning “a person who is emotional." Readers are encour- 
aged to peruse the Glossary at the end of the manual as a way 
ol becoming aware of terminological usages that lend them- 
selves to steteotyping and misinterpretation. 


Administering the MBTI 


Appropriate Populations 
for Administration 


Selection of the Appropriate Form 
Gaining Respondent Cooperation 
Introducing the MBTI 

Guidelines During Administration 
Scoring the MBTI Form M 


Conclusion 


ith all self-report instruments, it is important to 

create an atmosphere that ensures consistency 
of instructions, conditions, handling of respondent ques- 
tions, and other administrative variables in order to obtain 
accurate reports. Particular care is warranted when admin- 
istering the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator personality inven- 
tory because it seeks to maximize the respondents’ freedom 
to reveal personality preferences rather than skills, abilities, 
or simple attitudes. In answering cach question, respon- 
dents must choose between opposite aspects of personality, 
each of which they use at least some of the time; careful 
attention to administrative concerns is therefore encour- 
aged. This chapter covers administration guidelines that are 
applicable in all settings and for all or most respondents. 
Special administration issues relevant to particular uses of 
the MBTI assessment tool arc discussed in the appropriate 


application chapters (Chapters 10-14). 


106 Administration and Interpretation 


Appropriate Populations 
for Administration 


The MBTI varies in the extent to which it is suitable for dit- 
ferent kinds of respondents. This section discusses ages 
appropriate for administration, reading levels required, and 
translations. 


Appropriate Age Groups 


The original research for the MBTI measured the responses 
of a variety of populations from fourth-grade students to 
mature adults. When using the MBTI with high school stu- 
dents and adults who can read at least at the eighth-grade 
level, a professional can be reasonably confident of the 
reported type for individual guidance, provided that the 
reported type is never used as an established fact but rather 
is used as a hypothesis for verification. 

The MBTI is most appropriate for adults and students 
ages 14 and over. Be sure to exercise caution in interpreting 
results with 12- and 13-year-old students; according to the- 
ory, type is less developed in young people than in mature 
individuals. Younger students are likely to have less com- 
plete and confident knowledge of themselves and therefore 
are less able to report about the attitudes and behaviors that 
underlie their personality preferences. This theoretical 
assumption is supported by the generally lower reliabilities 
found for younger respondents (see Chapter 8). However, if 
you are careful, you can successfully test younger people 
and provide them with information about their type. 
Results for younger people may also be used for research 
that explores type differences in interests or learning styles. 
You can effectively elicit type for students ages 7 through 12 
using the Murphy-Meisgeiér Type Indicator for Children 
(MMTIC), for which there is a separate manual (Meisgeier 
&amp; Murphy, 1987). 


Reading Levels Required 


The reading level of a set of items can be approximately 
determined using a variety of approaches (DeVellis, 1991). 
However, conventional methods for assessing reading diffi- 
culty were not designed for test items, particularly an 
inventory that mixes forced-choice items and word pairs. 
Syntactic and semantic factors within the items—for exam- 
ple, simple versus complex sentence structure, the fact that 
cach phrase item actually forms two sentences, and the 
context of the words for the reader—will affect reading lev- 
els that are based on formulas of sentence and word length. 
I hus, you should use common sense when determining the 
appropriateness of the MBTI for various populations. 

The phrase items for Form M were analyzed using the 
Fry readability lormula, which uses the average number of 
sentences and syllables in 100-word samples to assign 


approximate grade equivalents to written passages (Fry, 
1977). This method vields a reading level of about seventh 
grade (approximately 12- to 13-year-olds) by treating each 
item as a single sentence.! Remember, however, that read- 
ing level is only an approximation and is not a substitute for 
knowing your clients well enough to assess the suitability 
of administering the MBTI to them. 


Available Translations 


Jungs theory is an attempt to describe basic human mental 


processes that cut across cultural differences. It is therefore 
reasonable to expect to find evidence of the existence of 
type and type differences in a wide range of cultures and 
countries. There are currently 14 commercial translations 
for which reliability and validity evidence are available and 
15 additional translations listed as research instruments. Suc- 
cessfully translating the MBTI is a lengthy and arduous task 
due to the need to take into account cultural and language 
differences that affect item content and meaning. The pro- 
cedure essentially requires repeating many of the steps 
Isabel B. Myers undertook in developing the original MBTI 
personality inventory. For further information on transla- 
tions and issues in translating, see Chapter 14 of this man- 
ual and Kirby and Barger (1996). Translating into diverse 
languages is an ongoing process. For information on the 
status of translations into particular langnages, contact the 
publisher, Consulting Psychologists Press. 


Selection of the Appropriate Form 


Several forms of the MBTI are available, all of which pro- 
vide basic four-letter type information. These forms differ 
in the amount and kind of additional information provided. 
In selecting a form, consider the purpose of using the 
MBTI, the time available for testing, and the testing situa- 
tion. Basic information about the forms appears in Table 
5.1. Note that where indicated, computer scoring services 
and scoring software are available from the publisher. 
orm V is now the standard form t epl » ad _As 
detailed in Chapter 2, Form M contains the newest items, 
the most precise scoring procedure, and the most current 
standardization samples to produce scoring weights. 
Among other improvements over previous forms, this form 
was designed to maximize precision of preference identifi- 
cation at the midpoint of each dichotomy and to eliminate 
the need for separate scoring keys for males and females. 
Form M and Form M self-scorable each contain 93 
items, all of which are scored for tvpe. Form G contains 126 
items, 32 of which are research items not scored for type. 
The self-scorable version of Form G contains only the 94 
items needed to produce type. Self-scorable forms of the 
Indicator have proven to be the most popular means to 









1 






107 


Administering the MBTI 





Table 5.1 Forms of the MBTI 
Number Approximate Scoring Method for 
Form of Items Administration Time Four-Letter Type Primary Uses 
M 93 15-25 minutes Templates or computer In settings where MBTI can be 
given in advance 

M self-scorable 93 15-25 minutes! Hand-scored by respondent Where time and subject 
or administrator availability are issues 

G 126 30—40 minutes Templates or computer Preceded Form M as standard form 

G self-scorable 94 20—30 minutes! Hand-scored by respondent Preceded Form M self-scorable 
or administrator 

K 131 30—40 minutes Form G templates or Where EIR subscales will be 
computer reviewed later 

J 290 75 minutes Form F templates or computer Where TDI subscales will be 


reviewed later 
————— OR X ee LLL nn ne Se T3 


Includes scoring time 


Table 5.2 MBTI Profiles and Reports 





Form Report Content 

i on Profile Basic preference information in a two-page report 

Eon Interpretive Report Profile and interpretive description of reported type 

Mor G Interpretive Report Profile and interpretive report that focuses on the individual's type as it is expressed in 
for Organizations business and organizational settings 

Mor G Team Report "Team type profile" that describes the functioning of a team with that array of types 

Mor G Career Report Report linking client type with career information and strategies for improving 

job satisfaction 

Mor G Strong &amp; MBTI Strong and MBTI results integrated for the client to identify occupations in a comprehensive 
Career Report career development system 

K Expanded Profile Three-page profile of results on the Expanded Interpretive Report 

K Expanded Interpretive Individualized narrative covering four-letter type, EIR profile and meaning of specific scores, 
Report and applications information 

J Type Differentiation Results on 27 subscales of the MBTI, including 20 EIR subscales and 7 Comfort- 


Indicator Profile Discomfort scales 


a a EES E——————_—————E—E— eee 


obtain results for four-letter type. Most of the items in Form 
K are used in producing the subscales of the MBTI Step I] 
Expanded Interpretive Report (EIR). Form J is considered 
the current research form of the MBTI and includes most of 
the items in other forms. The large pool of items in Form J 
generates seven subscales in addition to those produced by 
Form K. These seven subscales in combination with the 
subscales of the EIR form the Type Differentiation Indicator 


Gaining Respondent Cooperation 


The specific goal in administering the MBTI is to enable 
repondenis to answer the questions in a manner that will 
reflect their hypothesized “true type” or, more specifically, 
their verified “best-fit” type. The term true type reflects the 
assumption that every person has an underlying “truc” type 


(TDD. Both the EIR and TDI subscales are available only 
through computer scoring. For more information, consult 
the manuals for these scoring methods. 

Various profiles and reports are generated by the differ- 
ent forms of the MBTI. Table 5.2 identifies these and shows 
the form or forms of the MBTI that produce particular pro- 
files and reports. 


that may or may not be revealed by a measurement device. 
As such, the type reported by an individual on the MBTI or 
in using any other assessment method is always considered 


" | / 
to be a hypothesis rather than a “fact.” Best-fit type is the i» 


type verified by the respondent after participating in an 
interpretation session with a qualified professional, reading - 
alternative type descriptions, or using other verification 


108 


Administration and Interpretation 


procedures. Studies of best-fit type in relation to reported 
type are discussed in Chapters 2, 6, and 7. 

You can maximize accurate assessment of type through 
the Indicator by attending to several administrative issues 
both before and during administration. In addition to the 
general guidelines discussed here, each area of application 
of the MBTI may have special administration issues. These 
arc discussed in the relevant chapters in Part V. 

The MBTI differs from many personality measures in 
that the results are designed primarily for respondents. 
However, many people who take the instrument are un- 
aware af its differences from other personality measures. 
Therefore it is important to explain these differences prior 
to administration. 

The practitioner should strive to create an atmosphere in 
which individuals are interested in their results, can re- 
spond freely to the items, and can feel confident that the 
results are for their own purposes, not for the benefit of 
other people. The MBTI items are reasonably transparent, 
and answers can be falsified. Using the MBTI for purposes 
such as job selection and advancement is therefore inappro- 
priate, as respondents can easily answer the items so as to 
appear to be the type favored for a particular job or position 
within an organization. The MBTI can, however, be suc- 
cessfully included as part of the battery of tools typically 
used in personnel assessments. In such an application, the 
individuals type is not released to the manager, and there is 
a great deal of corroborating information on the individual 
from other tests, interviews, general employment history, 
and so forth. Practitioners should also be aware that the 
responsibility for using an instrument lor assessment pur- 
poses lies with them as users. 





Practitioners are responsible for being familiar with their 
own state guidelines on using an instrument for assessment 
purposes and with the intentions and wordings of the Ameri- 
cans with Disabilities Act, Civil Rights Act, Title VII, and other 
legislation dealing with privacy issues. 





To minimize false responses, practitioners should pro- 
vide respondents at the outset with consistent information 
about the voluntary nature of the testing process, the nature 
of the instrument, the purpose for which it is being admin- 
istered, and the confidentiality of results. Thus potential 
respondents should be informed of the following: 

Taking the MBTI is voluntary. Respondents who are 
required to take the instrument or who are subject to any 
form of coercion, such as employer or peer-group pressure 
to participate in the testing process, are unlikely to provide 
accurate results. Practitioners can increase respondent co- 
operation by assuring them that taking the Indicator is vol- 
untary. In addition, the information below can often prove 
persuasive. 

The MBTI does not assess mental or emotional health. The 
most accurate way of describing the nature of the MBTI is to 


- major feature of Ye the MBTI is th 


tell respondents that it looks at naturally varying preferences 
in the way people take in information and make decisions; 
it does not reflect intelligence, competence, or mental 
health. With the proliferation of tests to measure a wide 
variety of competencies and mental or emotional disorders, 
respondents may be understandably concerned about what 
the Indicator will reveal about them. It may therefore be 
useful to point out to respondents that the MBTI items do 
not reflect competence or mental health because the items 
were not designed for these purposes. 

Ihe results belong to the respondent. The MBTI is primar- 
ily for the benefit of the individual respondent and serves 
that persons purpose. Purposes can involve applications 
such as career advisement, learning strategies, couples ther- 
apy, and team building. (See application chapters for useful 
ways of explaining the purposes of the MBTI in each area.) 
Where the MBTI assessment tool is administered solely for 
research purposes, researchers might wish to offer respon- 
dents personal feedback so they can verify individual re- 
sults. Such a practice can increase cooperation and allow 
for more accurate data. pe " 

T he respondent is the judge of the accuracy of results. A 
ractice of having 
each respon | results. When peo- 
ple know that they will be told the results and invited to 
confirm or correct the report of their type, their answers are 
more likely to be genuine. 

An individuals MBTI results are confidential. Respon- 
dents in a variety of circumstances have legitimate con- 
cerns about who will have access to their MBTI results and 
how such information will be used. Providing assurances 
that results will not be released without the respondents 
permission can alleviate such concerns. Confidentiality 
can be an especially significant issue when the MBII is 
administered in a work environment. See Chapter 13 for 
detailed recommendations. 






Introducing the MBTI 


When introducing the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator person- 
ality inventory, do not call it a test; instead refer to it as 
the MBTI, the Indicator, or the Myers-Briggs personality 
inventory or questionnaire. Emphasize the fact that the 
MBTI is designed to indicate equally valuable preferences 
and does not have right and wrong answers, as do achieve- 
ment tests. 

Some people have trouble adito the right mind-set for 
answering the MBTI. The setting in which they answer the 
questions may influence them to report their “work self,” 
"school self," *ideal self," or some other self that is specific 
to external demands. Preferably, their frame of reference 
should reflect how they function most naturally, smoothly, 
and effortlessly, when they are not going “against the 


grain." Practitioners often use the term shoes-off self, but in 
some settings this expression might be interpreted nega- 
tively, for example in the military, where it may mean 
being lazy. 

When asking respondents to take the MBTI, consider 
the probable type of the individual client or the likely distri- 
bution of types in the group. Sensitivity to the following can 
also increase cooperation: 


BW Sensing types will want to know that the information 
will have some practical value. 

B Intuitive types will want to see possible future benefits. 
They may also find the choice between alternatives frus- 
trating; they like the widest possible range of possibilities. 

W Thinking types can be expected to be skeptical, since 
skepticism ts an important aspect of their type. It helps 
to acknowledge the skepticism and suggest they “wait 
and see.” 

m Introverted types can be expected to be concerned with 
privacy issues and whether they may unknowingly 
reveal sensitive personal information. Administrators 
can assure them that the MBTI will not reveal anything 
hidden or negative about them. It will instead organize 
information they already know about themselves so as to 
provide an interesting and useful way of understanding 
themselves and others. 


The MBTI is virtually self-administering. All necessary 
instructions are given on the cover of the question booklets 
and on the response sheets. In appropriate circumstances, 
respondents may be given or sent the question booklet and 
answer sheet for Forms M, G, K, or J to fill out and return 
for scoring. However, the subsequent verification and inter- 
pretation process should not be done through the mail or 
solely by providing written results without a professional 
interpreter. 





Note that Form M self-scorable and Form G self-scorable are 
intended for use primarily with groups where administration 
time is an issue and circumstances do not permit prior 
administration and scoring. In line with the guidelines for 
interpretation given in Chapter 6, respondents should not be 
permitted to self-score the instrument before the interpreter 
provides them with information about type. Respondents 
should be encouraged to double-check their scoring to 
reduce the chance of error. 





Regardless of the circumstances in which the MBTI is 
administered, the following should be reinforced, since 
many respondents read the instructions on the test booklet 
in a cursory fashion or not at all: 


B Remember there are no right or wrong answers. 

B It is best not to think too long about any question; your 
first response is likely to be most true for you. 

B If you cannot decide on a question, skip it. 








Administering the MBTI 109 





Guidelines During Administration 


When administering the MBTI, these guidelines should be 
followed: 


B Inform the individual that the MBTI has no time limit. 


Those who are making unusually slow progress, how- 
ever, may be encouraged to work more rapidly and not 
study the items at length. 


B In administering the MBTI to poor readers or younger 


children, it may be preferable to read the questions 
aloud; in reading, the examiner should be sure to sound 
open-minded and unbiased about both choices. 


B When administering forms M, G, k, and J to students 


below age 17, inform them that many of the questions 
were originally written for adults and they are not 
expected to be able to answer every one. However, 
encourage them to answer all questions if they are able. 

.plai | ; | ol words to 
do not allow group mem- 









not explain questions or meanings c 
dents. In group testing, 
s to discuss the items. 
When conducting group administration of the MBTI, 
read the instructions aloud, emphasizing the need for 
carefully filling in the identifying information. Note that 
a separate item booklet and answer sheet are provided 
for template scoring of Form M, so respondents should 
be careful to match numbers on the answer sheet to the 
numbers in the item booklet. Computer scoring of Form 
M requires administration of a single form that incorpo- 
rates both questions and responses. The self-scorable 
forms also combine questions and answers in one form. 
Make sure to use the form that corresponds to the scor- 
ing method you plan to use. 





WB Omissions should be encouraged only if respondents do 


not understand a question or cannot choose an answer 

because neither choice is more appealing or descriptive of 

them than the other. The reason for permitting omissions 
is that no item can reliably contribute useful evidence of 
type unless choices are understood and the question lies 
within the respondents experience. Information about 
percentages of omissions on Form M can be found in 
Chapter 7. In actual practice, only about 5% of respon- 
dents omit more than two items. However, where there 
are more than four.omissions on the E-1 or J-P 
dichotomy and more than five omissions on the S-N or 
T-F dichotomy, questions arise about the interpretability 
of those results. When Form M is computer scored, omis- 
sions exceeding these are flagged and a comment recom- 
mends caution in interpretation. Practitioners who use 
scoring templates should check answer sheets that con- 
tain more than three omissions overall to determine 
whether the omissions exceed the limits on any one 
dichotomy or are spread evenly throughout. Interpreta- 
tion should proceed cautiously where the number of 
omissions on any dichotomy is excessive. 





110 


Administration and Interpretation 


— = = ee — -—— — 0 — 








g When using thc Indicator in work situations, be alert to 
employee concerns about the demographic question 
related to employee satisfaction, which is asked so that 
research on job satisfaction can be carried out. Some 
respondents may be concerned that the information on 
satisfaction will be relayed to their superiors. However, if 
answer sheets are handled with proper attention to 
issues ol confidentiality, this should not be an issue. An 
explanation of confidentiality procedures should be pro- 
vided to respondents. But if their concern persists, they 
can be told to skip that demographic question. 


Scoring the MBTI Form M 


Form M is the revised version of Form G. The similarities 
and differences between the two forms are presented in 
Chapter 2 of this manual. Because of the differences, the 
results for the two forms may differ as well (see Chapter 7 
lor data on the statistical relationship betwcen Forms G and 
M). For the purpose of understanding the scoring lor Form 
M, rwo differences are worth repeating herc: 


m Separate scoring lor males and females on the T-F 
dichotomy is not used on Form M. 

m Respondents are permitted to mark only one of the two 
choices provided for each question (there are a number of 
items on Form G with more than two response choices). 


Results for Forms M and G may differ because the two forms 


are based on different items, scoring weights, and scoring 
procedures. 


Self-scoring, template (hand) scoring, prepaid (mail-in) 
scoring, and on-site software scoring with the CPP Software 
System are all available for Form M, as they are for Form G. 
This section presents the instructions for scoring the self- 
scorable and template versions of Form M and provides a 
brief discussion of the software scoring. Users should be 
aware that templates are also available for scoring prepaid 
versions of Form M. À set of eight templates, onc for cach 
preference, is required. 

The prepaid (mail-in) scoring and the on-site softwarc 
scoring options for Form M use itcm response theory to 
derive the persons preferences, type, and prehcrence clarity 
indexes. These IRI-based procedures yield the most precise 
classification of a respondents preferences on the four 
dichotomies. Both scoring options also allow practitioners 
to generate their own detailed, computer-scored reports, 
which are listed in Table 5.2. The kinds of scores available 
from the mail-in scoring and the software, and a discussion 
of IRT scoring, are found in Chapter 7. The instructions for 
scoring Form G and for converting Form G raw scores to 
preference scores and continuous scores can be found in 
the 1985 MBTI Manual. 


Both the template and self-scorable versions of Form M 
use unit weighting. So, unlike with Form G, there are no 
separate weights for each item response. Each response is 
counted as one point. A persons preference on a given scale 
is therefore the pole of the dichotomy that he or she chose 


most often. The advantage of using unit weighting is thes, 


simplicity of both the interpretation and the scoring, both 
important considerations when the MBTI is being used in a 
workshop or group setting when quick results are needed. 
However, unit weights are not as precise or accurate as thc 
IRT method used with computer scoring because on the 
template and self-scorable versions, all items are considcred 
to have equal amounts of information. On the computer- 
scored versions (prepaid mail-ins and on-site software), on 
the other hand, maximum use is made of all the informa- 
tion available from cach item. Items that do a better job of 
separating people into opposite preferences receive more 
weight. So, for those who wish the most precise scoring, 
one of the computer-scored versions is required. 


Template Scoring of Form M 


Template scoring of Form M is accomplished using four tem- 
plates, one for each of the E-I, S-N, T-F J-P dichotomies. 
Separate scoring keys for males and females are not used 
with Form M. The T—F template can be used for both sexes. 
The procedure for scoring is as follows: 


1. Place the template over the answer sheet, matching 
the square openings on the template to the asterisks 
on both sides of the answer sheet. This will expose 
the answers marked for E, S, T, or J, whichever tem- 
plate is being used. 

. Count the number of answers showing through the 
openings in the template to obtain the raw points for 
E, S, T, or J, whichever template is being used. Write 
the raw points for this scale in the space provided on 
the answer shect. 

3. Move the template to the left, matching the square 
openings on the template to the asterisks on both sides 
of the answer sheet. This will expose the answers 
marked for I, N, E or P, whichever template is being 
used. 

4. Count the number of answers showing through the 
openings in the template to obtain the raw points for 
I, N, Eor P, whichever template is being used. Write 
the raw points in the space provided on the answer 
sheet. Follow the same procedure for each dichotomy 
until you have determined all eight raw points. 

5. For each individual dichotomy, look at the raw points 
lor cach pole and determine which has the larger point 
value. Write the letter and the number ol that prefer- 
ence in the column titled “Preference Clarity Category.” 
If the raw points are equal, write I, N, F or P, depending 
on the dichotomy, following the tie-breaking method 
used by Isabel Myers in previous forms of the Indicator 
(see Chapter 7 for the rationale involved). 


AO 


| 


111 


Administering the MBTI 


Table 5.3 Example of MBTI Form M Template- and Self-Scorable Results 


Pole of the Pole of the 
Dichotomy Raw Points Dichotomy Raw Points Preference Preference Clarity 
E 20 | | E Very Clear 
S || N I5 Slight 
T I8 F 1j Moderate 
J 19 P 3 J Clear 


es ee Se ee eS eee CENWEIOLOILEGITY— ea Ee 


6. [Optional] If you wish to report back to the respon- 


dent additional information about the clarity of his or 


her preference on each dichotomy, use the conversion 
table on the template. For that dichotomy, identify 
the highest raw points and then in the middle column 
of the table, find the range that contains that raw point 
value. Read across to the right column and identify the 
preference clarity category associated with that value. 
The preference clarity categories are “slight,” “moder- 
ate," "clear," and “very clear" (see Chapter 6 for how 
to interpret these categories). 


Answering and Scoring 
the Self-Scorable Form M 


The procedure when using the self-scorable form of the 
MBTI is as follows: 


1. Read each question and mark an X in the appropriate 
box. After all questions have been answered, open the 
perforation and turn the page. 

Reading across each row, count the number of marks in 

each of the boxes in that row. Enter the total in the 

shaded box to the right of the row. Do this for each row. 

3. Next, read down each column and add all the num- 
bers in that column. Enter the total in the box at the 
bottom of the column. These numbers are the raw 
points for each preference. 

4. For each dichotomy separately, look at the raw points 
for each pole and determine which has the largest 
point value. Write the letter of the preference with the 
largest point value. If the raw points are equal, write I, 
N, F or P, depending on the dichotomy. 

5. [Optional] H you wish additional information about 
the clarity of your preference on each dichotomy, use 
the conversion table. For each dichotomy, identify the 
highest raw point value, and then in the hrst column 
of the conversion table, find the range that contains 
this raw point value. Then read across to the second 
column and identify the preference clarity category 
(“slight,” “moderate,” “clear,” or “very clear") associ- 
ated with this value. (See Chapter 6 for how to inter- 
pret these categories). If the raw points are equal, just 
look up that number tn the table. 


I 


An Example of Template- and 
Self-Scorable Form M Results 


An example of a persons results as they would appear on 
either the template- or sclf-seorable versions of Form M 
appears in Table 5.3, and preference clarity category con- 
version tables for all four scales appear in Table 5.4. The 
person whose scores are shown in Table 5.3 answered 20 of 
the 21 items on the E-I dichotomy in the E direction (there 
were 20 marks showing through the E part of the template, 
or there were 20 marks in the E column on the self- 
scorable), and therefore his raw points for E are 20. Repeat- 
ing the scoring procedure with either the I portion of the 
template or the I column on the self-seorable, we find that 
the point value for is 1. Because the raw points are 20 for E 
and | for I, the preference letter is E, which is entered on 
the top line of the results box on the template scoring sheet 
under "Preference." 

Of course, knowing the total number of items on each 
scale allows you or the respondent to use subtraction to 
determine the raw points for the other preference on a 
given dichotomy, once the raw point value for the first pref- 
erence is known. In this example, knowing that there are 21 
items on the E-I scale and then subtracting the 20 raw 
points for E leaves 1 as the raw point value for l. It is recom- 
mended, however, that you also use both portions of the 
template for each scale, or count down both columns of the 
self-scorable, as a check on the accuracy of your counts. 

The Form M template- and sell-scorable versions empha- 
size the identification of the four preferences that yield a 
persons type. Determination of preference clarity through 
the preference clarity category (pee) is optional when using 
these forms. The most important aim of emphasizing the 
preference rather than any estimate of the clarity of the pref- 
erence is to discourage misinterpretation of the MBTI. 

Practitioners and clients who want an estimate of pref- 
erence clarity for the four dichotomies cau use the conver- 
sion table shown in Table 5.4. To use this table, the proce- 
dure is as follows: 


l. Look up the largest of the raw points for that 
dichotomy. In the example above, the person scored 
20 on E and 1 on I. 

Find the range in the E-I table that contains 20. 


P2 


112 Administration and Interpretation 





Table 5.4 Converting Raw Points to 
Preference Clarity Categories 
Greatest Preference 
Dichotomy Raw Points Clarity Category 
E-I [1-13 Slight 
14-16 Moderate 
17-19 Clear 
20-21 Very Clear 
S-N 13-15 Slight 
16-20 Moderate 
21-24 Clear 
25-26 Very Clear 
T-F 12-14 Slight 
15-18 Moderate 
19-22 Clear 
23-24 Very Clear 
J-P 11-13 Slight 
14-16 Moderate 
17-20 Clear 
21-22 Very Clear 


Note: Omitting items on a scale may result in the highest raw points on 
that scale being lower than the range found in this table. tn this case, nse 
"slight" as the pec. 


3. Read across to determine which preference clarity 
category this score represents. In this example, a 20 
indicates a “very clear" preference. 

+. Follow the same procedure for the preferences shown 
on each of the remaining three dichotomies. 


. The reason for deemphasizing scores on the MBTI is that 
scores are somctimes viewed as reflecting traits that identify 
greater or lesser proficiency, maturity, or accessibility of a 
preference. 

Make sure clients clearly understand that the focus is on 
the direction of the preference. The preference clarity cate- 
gories, like the more precise prefcrence clarity index that 
results from computer scoring, do not reflect competence, 
maturity, or ease of access to their preferences. Even the pci, 
like its predecessor, the preference score, shows only how 
consistently a person answered the questions in the direc- 
tion of the preferred pole of a dichotomy. 


Using Results for Research Purposes 


[t is recommended that researchers use one of the computer- 
scored versions (prepaid mail-in or software) of Form M 
when the goal is to usc scores for research purposes. This 
will allow the usc of the @ scores that result from the IRT 
scoring, which are the most precise scores available. (It is 


not recommended that the pci be used because preference 
clarity indexes have a more restricted range, which will 
result in attenuated correlations.) Note that using continu- 
ous scores for research is contradictory to the dichotomous 
nature of the MBTI. It does, however, allow investigators to 
examine rclationships between single MBTI dichotomies 
and the many traits measured by other instruments using 
common quantitative statistical procedures. Be cautious in 
interpreting such results because the correlational method is 
not consistent with type theory. A preferred alternative to 
using continuous scores would be to use whole types, the 
preferences, or the preference clarity categories as indepen- 
dent variables. This would also allow for results from the 
template- and self-scorable versions of Form M to be used 
lor research. These results can be examined using categorical 
analyses that are more congruent with type theory. See Chap- 
ter 9 for a more thorough discussion of issues associated 
with analyses of MBTI scores. 


Software 


The CPP Software System, which uses a Microsoft? Win- 
dows? environment, is available under license from the 
publisher for total on-site management of the MBTI. This 
system provides three options for MBTI online administra- 
tion: the items presented to the client on the computer 
screen; a printed item booklet/answer sheet followed by 
key-in of the clients responses; an item booklet/answer 
sheet that can be scanned into the computer on-site. 

Once the clients responses have been entered into the 
computer using onc of these three methods, the profes- 
sional can select the reports desired for immediate printing, 
lor example the MBTI Interpretive Report or the MBTI 
Career Report. The software provides local customer op- 
tions for printing. 

To facilitate not only the selection and preparation of the 
appropriate reports but also thc management ol client infor- 
mation, client information and item responses are collected 
into a database. [n addition, the database will help the pro- 
[cssional track the administrations of the MBTI and other 
assessment tools that are available through the system (e.g., 
the Strong Interest Inventory®, the California Psychological 
Inventory, and the Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Ori- 
cntation-Behavior"" [FIRO-B"" D). 

The client software module (the part of the software sys- 
tem used by the client when taking the items online) can be 
networked or installed from a floppy disk for administra- 
tion of the MBTI at multiple computers. These results can 
then be transferred to a computer containing the licensed 
software to produce the appropriate reports and to be 
included in the database. 


Internet Delivery of the MBTI 


For electronic administration of the MBTI personality 
inventory, the CPP Web Administration Site is available 
under license from the publisher. This delivery system 


allows the professional to provide clients in remote locations 
with easv access to assessment via the World Wide Web. 
The site has been carcfully developed to maintain confiden- 
tiality of results. 

To aceess the MBTI, clients must receive a password from 
the professional with whom thev are working. Once a client 
has taken the Inventory, the professional receives automatic 
notification via e-mail. The professional then downloads the 
clients responses to his or her own computer and uscs the 
CPP Software Svstem to gencrate any reports that are avail- 
able on the system. The professional must then use standard 
type verification procedures for verifying client type, which 
can be found in Chapter 6. Other assessments such as the 
Strong Interest Inventory and the FIRO-B are also available 
through this delivery system. 





Guidelines for helping clients verify their reported type 
appear in Chapter 6. Following these guidelines is important 
for all practitioners, including those who obtain MBTI re- 
sults using the Internet. 


Each professional with a Web Administration Site re- 
ceives a unique Web address. He or she can choose to have 
a personalized introductory page that can include a logo, 
pertinent business information such as phone and fax num- 
bers, a message to clients, and an e-mail link. 


Administering the MBTI 113 


The Web Administration Site provides professionals a safe 
and efficient option for delivering assessments to clients. 
The availability of the MBTI and other assessment tools via 
the World Wide Web means that more clients can benefit 
from the important information provided through the vari- 
ous individualized reports. 


Conclusion 


Peoples assumptions and expectations about the MBTI are 
likelv to be influenced bv their previous experiences in 
answering questionnaires and participating in assessment 
procedures. The most critical first step in using this instru- 
ment is therefore to ensure that clients understand its pur- 
poses, how it will be useful to them, and how it differs from 
other instruments that appear to bc similar. Carefully fol- 
lowing the administration guidelines in this chapter will 
increase the likelihood of obtaining accurate results that 
will benefit the client. A practitioner who understands the 
rationale underlying the administration guidelines is in the 
best position to answer client questions and concerns in 
any situation in which the MBTI is administered. Many of 
the specific administration issues and possible client con- 
cerns are included in appropriate chapters in Part V. 








E an (mc a2 Ti 
»o ENTE i 
A 
24 ba m 
? adii ar E 


Se dd 


T 4$ie 82 Te 


Ci &gt;. "8 YAP 


jeunes AM 


"es mo Mall 


PORE gos 


A air m 


sg ati dade mo © gels Wai Moos ui eb e . Lom 

à me ^4: À ewin vot) aj ume ede POE ned 
oq 

vé qdiudanO leer ed al cose redi ca op TP, 


(ire ea ein! n 
He ie ila HELLE 
à UNDIS 


aAa 600 @ius 


paiia tu mco 
enddlilce dre» 
ApunsA Tr«Ty me nw 


i” id rir. Inr Anna NU piloted ema flam ia 


e p «9 
LS 


dadi (a?) á LE 
war's &amp; Ya? ef @ 


CES- ® Si) se | 


aa 
? 
' CARA 
$ A 
D 
* | 
T 
d 
A 
= 
We 
i Lit 
E NS 


nm us Deo me, «Eme 
a aim dà 


A 3 Bos P «444 


EP Y AM GLA ea. 


E P n 
[ E 
[ 9 
a 
4 8 
e i 
E. Es. | 
p i 
oe 
Ó m 
bi ' ' 7 
sa 
&gt; &amp; "T7729 
a i oe as 
"a $ 6. B 


an [TSM dade pte sat 













say: bhai alfo e 


pA: Tw 


mE 


Í bl nt iL @ ul 
E sb ATUS! ^t 
"Dis Jit. CL. r 
du Ttt ELE: 


puel © XE sed 


»4 ceps abr wie Md XX 

sk 1 | i, 

i bros iann SRO Ue ue Wa ger pil 

4 oa” a wihwuivddsdo— 

"ua cont Uem) qal 

à uia lá ef ard. Op dd rn 

ina mom kno de i 

i pur de Pur d : 

"ne és 2Áed as see - A J 

m esi ii wien ue 

Jw COE po 

sr. ina d peti — 

o acit "ue wa "A U 

~recetr! w Hii Dur " 

29 f.rüe META ' — 

ite cm PT IS 

esse d pple Jui 
^. dad doe diui 

























LA 


^» 


aaa 


Cl 





Interpreting Results of the MBTI 


Research Evidence Regarding 
Reported and Verified Type 


Introducing the Interpretation 
Verifying Type 


Explaining Type Dynamics 
and Development 


Factors That Influence 
Accuracy of Self-Report 


Interpreting the Preference Clarity 
Index and Preference Clarity 


Categories on the MBTI 


Conclusion 


and Verifying Type 


his chapter reviews issues in explaining Myers-Briggs 

Iype Indicator personality inventory results to clients 
In any setting and in all areas of application. Special inter- 
pretation issues relevant to particular uses of the MBTI are 
discussed in the appropriate applications chapters ( Chapters 
10-14). Because MBTI reports are designed to be given 
directly to respondents, interpretation necessarily includes 
steps to help respondents verify the accuracy of their results 
through their own self-knowledge. Bear in mind, however, 
that whereas professionals may be appropriately skeptical 
about the capability of any measure to reflect the complexity 
ol personality, laypeople may put too much trust in psycho- 
logical test data. It is particularly important for interpreters 
to use strategies that encourage respondents to verily thc 
report against their own experience. The risk of respondents 
being overly aecepting of their results is greater for the Indi- 
cator than for instruments that report scores on a contin- 
uum because types are reported in letters and descriptions 
that can give the results a sense ol certainty that goes beyond 


the actual data. 


115 


116 . Administration and Interpretation 


Research Evidence Regarding 
Reported and Verified Type 


A number of researchers have looked at the percentage of 
respondents who agree with their type reports. Table 6.1 
shows the results of four studies of reported and verified 
type. The studies listed are not strictly comparable because 
their research designs and the kinds of samples studied var- 
ied considerably. Across these studies, perfect agreement on 
all four letters of type varied from the low of 58926-6870 
reported hy Kummerow to the high of 85% found by Ham- 
mer and Yeakley. Reports indicate that agreement on at least 
three of the four dichotomies is much higher, ranging from 
Kummerows 90% to the 99% found by Hammer and Yeak- 
ley. The one study of respondents outside the United States 
involved a sample of 370 participants in type workshops in 
the United Kingdom. Results for this group were comparable 
to those for the U.S. samples. Note that in all four studies, 
Form G was used. Table 9.17 in Chapter 9 provides addi- 
tional information about reported and best-fit type studies. 

Both the Walck and the Hammer and Yeakley studies 
verify practitioner experience in finding that discrepancies 
between reported and best-fit type occur most frequently 
for dichotomies on which initial reported clarity of prefer- 
ence is slight. A slight preference means that the respondent 
has “split his or her vote,” answering about half the items 
favoring each pole of the dichotomy. Analysis using Cohen's 
kappa (a measure of the agreement between two ratings) 
for the Kummerow study and the Hammer and Yeakley 
study as low and high estimates reveals a range from kappa 
= .59 as the low estimate to kappa = .79 as the high esti- 
mate, where kappa of 0 = no agreement and kappa of 1.00 = 
perfect agreement. Another way of interpreting the above 
reported and verified type data is to bear in mind that the 
expected agreement for any one of the 16 categories by 
chance alone is only 6.25%. The figures in Table 6.1, there- 
fore, greatly exceed chance expectation. 

Although interpreting and verifying type results are 
important even when respondents report clear preferences, 
a major task in interpretation is to help respondents with 
less clear reported preferences arrive at a comfortable and 
accurate assessment of their type. This is accomplished in 
an interpretation session mainly through an exploration of 
how type preferences appear in client behaviors. 


Introducing the Interpretation 


Interpretation of MBTI results should be a joint process 
between the professional giving the interpretation and the 
respondent reacting. The interpreter should never say flatly, 
“You are such and such a type.” The statement not only 


Table 6.1 Percentage of Respondents Who 
Agree with Their Type Reports 


Agree on Agree on 
Source 4 Letters 3 Letters 
Hammer &amp; Yeakley, 1 987 85% 99% 
Kummerow, 1988 5875—6876 9076-9576 
Walck, 1992a 7576 9676 
Oxford Psychologists Press, | 993 7676 9776 


sounds arbitrary and limiting but also may not be true. 
MBTI results are, of course, not always right. The reported 
type should be submitted to the respondents judgment 
with statements such as, “This shows how you answered. 
Does it describe you, or does it fit you?" 

As with any self-report instrument, the accuracy of the 
results depends in part on how willing or able the person is 
to self-report his or her preferences. If people answering the 
MBTI inventory feel that they have nothing to gain, they 
may answer carelessly or even at random. If they fear they 
have something to lose, thev may answer as they assume 
they should. Many of the administration recommendations 
in the preceding chapter are wavs of maximizing the accu- 
racy of self-report. However, should there be reason to 
believe that a respondent did not answer candidly, appropri- 
ate inquiry might be made. 


Essential Points to Make to Clients 


It is strongly recommended that respondents self-assess their 


preferences prior to being provided with their MBTI results. 


The following eight points are basic information for an initial 
interpretation session either with individuals or in a group 
setting. Incorporating them into the feedback plan ensures 
that a cooperative and collegial tone will be maintained 
throughout the interpretation and verification process. It is 
strongly recommended that these points be covered, an 
explanation of each of the dichotomies be provided, and an 
opportunity for self-assessment of preferences occur before 
any MBTI results are provided to individuals or groups. This 
sequence increases understanding, conveys respect for the 
individuals self-knowledge, and discourages respondents 
from agreeing too readily with their reported type. 


I. No questions, however accurate, can lead to answers 
that explain all human complexity. The MBTI results 
give the respondent and the interpreter a hypothesis 
about an individual's type. As such, the results are a 
first step toward understanding the respondents true 
or best-fit type. 

. Each item in the MBTI requires the respondent to 
make a choice between two opposite alternatives. 


IN 


These choices may seem difficult because they all 
describe activities that are necessary and valuable. 
Such choices are more difficult than choices betwcen 
things considered good or bad. It is often useful to 
describe the process of responding to the MBTI as one 
of casting votes in four “elections,” each with two 
good candidates. 

3. The terms and letters may seem a little strange at first, 
but the behaviors described by those terms typically 
are familiar to the respondent. 

4. The MBTI is an "indicator," not a test. There are no 
right or wrong answers. There are also no good or 
bad, or sick or well, types. All types are valuable. 

5. Whatever the type, one does use both sides of each 
dichotomy, though not with equal ease or liking. A 
useful analogy is that preferences are like handedness. 
For the most part, people are either right-handed or 
left-handed. However, people do use both hands, 
usually reaching first with the preferred hand because 
itis more comfortable and natural to do so. 

6. People typically use and develop more ease and effec- 
tiveness with the functions and attitudes they like 
than with their opposites. However, because this is 
not always true, one should not assume that having a 
preference ensures using it skillfully or effectively. 

7. Type preferences are important for understanding 
how people assimilate information and make deci- 
sions. They describe processes that will seem familiar 
to respondents. One value of type is that it helps peo- 
ple use the information they already know about 
themselves and others in more organized and practi- 
cal ways. 

8. If a reported function, attitude, or whole type does 
not seem right when MBTI results are provided, 
respondents can discover and decide for themselves, 
with help from the interpreter, which preference or 
which type more accurately describes them. 


Explaining the Four Dichotomies 


The next step is to explain the nature of the two alternatives 
that are included in each dichotomy. The following is a rec- 
ommended procedure for presenting each dichotomy: 


l. Define the dichotomy itself by focusing on what it 
describes. For example: "Extraversion and Introver- 
sion deal with how we are energized and how we pre- 
fer to use our energy." 

2. Define each pole of the dichotomy and give examples 
relevant to the clients experience or purpose in tak- 
ing the Indicator. Using language such as the follow- 
ing helps emphasize the important fact that everyone 
uses both poles of a dichotomy at least some of the 
time: "When we are extraverting, we are focusing on 
the outside world of people, the environment, and 
action. When we are introverting, our attention is on 


Interpreting Results of the MBTI and Verifying Ivpe 117 


our internal world of ideas, inner experiences, and 
rellection.” 

3. For cach dichotomy, discuss the ways in which peo- 
ple who prefer one pole of a dichotomy dilfer from 
those who prefer its opposite. For example, "People 
who prefer Extraversion are likely to be energized by 
being around people and activities. Extraverts thcre- 
lore typically seek out situations that permit them to 
experience and interact with the outside world. Peo- 
ple who prefer Introversion are likely to be most 
energized when they can spend time alone in reflec- 
tion. [ntroverts therefore typically seek out situations 
that permit them to do more introverting than 
extraverting." 


It is helpful to modify the descriptions of the opposite 
preferences of each dichotomy to accommodate the respon- 
dents type and the time available. Concrete behavioral 
examples are helpful for bringing the theoretical abstrac- 
tions into everyday experience, especially when explaining 
type concepts to Sensing types. Visual aids and illustrative 
anecdotes that highlight differences are helpful for all types. 


Verifying Type 


Any type identification method, including an individuals 
responses to the Indicator, are subject to the errors in 
understanding and interpretation that are associated with 
all self-assessment methods. In light of the reliability and 
validity evidence reported in Chapters 8 and 9, reported 
type as elicited through the MBTI appears to be the best 
available personality type estimate for an individual. Nev- 
ertheless, the routine use of several corroborating veriftca- 
tion methods is recommended in order either to provide 
maximum assurance that the reported type is correct or to 
enable identification of a different, better-fitting type. A 
number of such approaches to verification are described in 
this section. 

An essential first step is to explain each preference in a 
neutral and unbiased manner and give examples of each 
pair of opposites that are relevant to the clients interests 
and life circumstances. When done carefully, this provides 
an illustration of type differences and is also a first check on 
the accuracy of the reported type. After each dichotomy has 
been described, clients should be given an opportunity to 
assess how they believe they came out in answering the 
Indicator. This may be accomplished simply by asking 
them how they think they came out—for example, “How 
do you think you answered on that one?" An alternative 
feedback procedure such as that described in Verifying Your 
Type Preferences (Kummerow, 1986) may be used. This is 
particularly helpful when giving feedback to groups, as it 
guides respondents through the initial process. 


118 — Administration and Interpretation 


—— 











The interpreter may then tell the client which preference 
was actually reported. (Some respondents may prefer to 
have their results on the four dichotomies given to them all 
at once after they have heard about all the dichotomies. The 
interpreter can ask the respondent which procedure is pre- 
ferred.) If the clients assessment agrees with reported results, 
the correctness of the reported preference is tentatively con- 
firmed. When a characteristic is not confirmed, the prefer- 
ence in question should be considered to be in doubt and 
evaluated further. 

In this portion of the feedback process, care should be 
taken to avoid implying that the client is “wrong” in her or 
his assessment or that the reported type holds greater 
weight than the clients self-knowledge. Language such as 
^You answered indicating the opposite preference of thc 
dichotomy, so well have to explore that further" presents 
the required neutral stance in these circumstances. 

Practitioners can choose from among a number of verifi- 
cation aids, depending on the interpreter level of experi- 
ence with MBTI interpretation and the needs of the client or 
client group. The material that follows describes each of 
these aids. 


Brief Descriptions of Each Type 


One way of checking the reported type is through the use of 
the table “Characteristics Frequently Associated with Each 
Type" on the back of the template scoring profile sheet and 
also included in [ntroduction to Type, which is discussed 
below. This table contains short type sketches. People often 
find it easier to recognize themselves among these minia- 
ture portraits than to recognize their preferences one at a 
time. The booklet Profile of Your MBTI Results (Lawrence &amp; 
Martin, 1996) describes each of the 16 types using a bul- 
leted list of characteristics. Some of the brief descriptions 
contained in the Introduction to Type booklets that are 
designed for specifie groups can also be helpful. These are 
listed in the next section. 

When using the brief type tables for verification, the 
individual should first read the type description that corre- 
sponds to the reported type and then compare this with 
neighboring type descriptions. Should another type descrip- 
tion seem to fit the client as well or better, that type should be 
respectfully included for consideration as the individual's 
“best-fit” type. 


Using Introduction to Type 


If people who take the MBT] inventory are to make real use 
of the results, they need more information than is in the 
report form and more than they can remember from a ver- 
bal explanation. Io meet this need, Introduction to Type was 
written to be used as an interpretation and verification tool. 
When MBTI results are provided to individuals or groups, 
the task is made simpler if people can further verify their 
initial assessment of their type by reading one or more of 


the full type descriptions in Introduction to Type. By allowing 
them to see the type contrasts, this booklet helps respon- 
dents “put it all together.” Further, practitioners generally 
agree that people get the most out of type when they have 
access to all 16 type descriptions both during and atter veri- 
fication of their type. It is recommended that all individuals 
and group members be given a personal copy of Introduction 
to Type or an alternative set of descriptions of all 16 types. 


For maximum and continuing type understanding, give each 


client a full set of type descriptions. 


Since the original Introduction to Type was written by Isabel 
Briggs Myers in 1962, it has undergone several revisions. The 
current version is the sixth edition. It is a guide to under- 
standing MBTI results for respondents in all situations. In 
addition, versions of the information contained in the booklet 
are available to address the additional interests of particular 
groups. These include Introduction to Tvpe Dynamics and 
Development (Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994), Introduction to Type and 
Careers (Hammer, 1993), Introduction to Type and Teams 
(Hirsh, 1998), Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; 
Kummerow, 1998), Using Type in Selling (Brock, 1994), and 
Introduction to Type in College (DiTiberio &amp; Hammer, 1993). 

Introduction to Type provides additional information that 
ean be useful in helping a client verify his or her type. The 
following areas are covered: 


The mutual usefulness of opposite types 

The effects of preferences in work situations 

The effects of different pairings of thc preferences 
Type and career choice 

Type and problem solving 

Type and relationships 


The full-page type descriptions in Introduction to Type are 
included in Chapter 4+. Each describes one type at its best, 
gives the characteristics of people of that type, describes 
how others see people of this type, and discusses potential 
areas for growth within the type. All 16 describe type as 
exemplified by normal, well-balanced, effective people. In 
theoretical terms, the descriptions assume adequate devel- 
opment of two processes, the dominant and the auxiliary. 
However, the section of the type description that discusses 
potential areas for growth includes information about the 
possible effects of lack of development of the auxiliary 
function and the dominant function, as well as a brief 
description of the natural consequences of devoting less 
energy to the tertiary and inferior functions. 

The facing pages in all versions of Introduction to Type give 
a description of a pair of types with the same dominant 
process. The pair differ only in their auxiliary process. For 
example, for the two extraverted Thinking types, the descrip- 
tions on the facing pages are EST] and ENTJ; both are 
extraverted Thinking types, but EST] has introverted Sensing 
as the auxiliary process, and ENT] has introverted Intuition 


as the auxiliary. Similarly, ISEP and INFP appear on facing 
pages. Both have introverted Feeling as their dominant func- 
tion, but for ISFP, extraverted Sensing is the auxiliary; and 
lor INFP the auxiliary function is extraverted Intuition. 


Development of the Type Descriptions 


The sixth edition of Introduction to Type (ITT) is a revision of 
the 1993 (fifth) edition, by Linda K. Kirby and Katharine D. 
Myers. The original (1962) type descriptions, written by 
Isabel Myers, were firmly grounded in Jungs theory of psy- 
chological types, as developed and expanded by Myers and 
Briggs. Longtime users of the MBTI are aware of major differ- 
ences in the style, format, and content of the fifth edition as 
compared to previous versions of the booklet. In developing 
the type descriptions in this edition, Kirby and Myers pre- 
served the solid theoretical basis provided by Myers. In addi- 
tion, they capitalized on a wealth of information from their 
own and others’ research, many years of practitioner observa- 
tions, and the knowledge of people who had expertise about 
their own and others’ types. The revised type descriptions are 
based on the following resources and procedures: 


B Myers original type descriptions, as well as descriptions 
published in five different popular works, were reviewed. 
Statements describing each type were extracted and com- 
piled by type into a questionnaire. 

M The questionnaire was administered to groups of five or 
six people of each type, each of whom had taken the 
MBTI, received feedback, verified their type, and indi- 
cated confidence about their best-fit type—but who had 
little additional experience using type. About 120 people 
completed the questionnaire. 

B The questionnaire was also sent to about 30 type 
experts—people who were very experienced and knowl- 
edgeable about type in general and about their own type 
as well. 

B The results from both general respondents and type 
experts were combined with ratings of descriptors used 
in several research studies conducted by McCarley and 
Carskadon (1986) and Ruhl and Rodgers (1992). All of 
these data were compiled to identily descriptors that 
were ranked “very high,” “high,” “moderate,” and “low.” 

8 The highest-ranked descriptors were used in the ITT 
descriptions. 

B Persons of each type were consulted to ensure that the 
final descriptors acccurately reflected the characteristics 
that each type considered to be most important as well as 
accurate. 


s (4 


These carefully developed type descriptions are further 
enhanced by the consistency and logic of their presentation. 
The type descriptions include the type at its best, as charae- 
terized by the dominant function and attitude and auxiliary 
function and attitude, as seen by others, and in terms ol 
potential areas for growth—lor example, when either the 


Interpreting Results of the MBTI and Verifying Type 119 


dominant or auxiliary function is not developed. Each 
description concludes with a picture of how eaeh type 
appears in exaggerated form, when there is inadequate 
access to the tertiary and inferior funetions, and when a 
person of that type is in the grip of the inferior function. 


Explaining Type Dynamics 
and Development 


An explanation of the dynamic nature of type theory and 
the MBTI is typically reserved for a later discussion of 
type, depending on the time available and the particular 
application involved. However, if the interpreter will not 
have a later opportunity to explain type dynamics and 
development to an individual or group, it is essential that 
a general explanation of this area be included in the inter- 
pretation session. When such a procedure is not included, 
respondents can easily dismiss their MBTI results as noth- 
ing but static and rigid categories or “boxes.” Such a mis- 
understanding will limit a respondents ability to make 
practical and effective use of the type information pro- 
vided. At a minimum, therefore, when the interpreter has 
only a single opportunity to explain the MBTI, the follow- 
ing aspects of dynamics and development should be cov- 
ered, at least briefly: 


B A four-letter type reflects a dynamic and developmental 
system lor describing personality. Each type typically uses 
the favorite forms of Perceiving and Judging in specific 
ways but is also free to use the less-preferred processes as 
well. A persons type does not change over time; however, 
people may express their type in somewhat different ways 
at different times and at different ages and stages of life. 
One consequence of this is that some people may answer 
the MBTI questions differently at different life stages. 

B Each type has a dominant, or leading, function and tends 
to use it in the preferred attitude of Extraversion or Intro- 
version. Fach type also has an auxiliary, balancing func- 
tion that tends to be used in the less-preferred attitude of 
Extraversion or Introversion. The title of each type in 
Introduction to Typc identifies the dominant and auxiliary 
functions. For example, the title for EST] is Extraverted 
Thinking with Introverted Sensing. This indicates that for 
ESTJ types, extraverted Thinking is the dominant function 
and introverted Sensing is the auxiliary function. The title 
for INTP is Introverted Thinking with Extraverted Intuition, 
specifying introverted Thinking as the dominant function 
and extraverted Intuition as the auxiliary function. 

B The function that is the polar opposite of the dominant 
function, called the inferior function, tends to be the least 
developed, least experienced, and least comfortable part 
ol ones type. For example, the inferior function for EST], 
whose dominant function is extraverted Thinking, is 


120 Administration and Interpretation 


introverted Feeling, the polar opposite of extraverted 
Thinking. 

W The polar opposite of the auxiliary function is called the 
tertiary function. It tends to be somewhat more accessible 
and comfortable than the inferior function. 

B The dynamics of type, as identified by the dominant, aux- 
iliary, tertiary, and inferior functions, describe the individ- 
uality and richness of personality in ways that people can 
easily recognize and understand. These dynamics are 
embodied in the type descriptions in Introduction to Type. 


In addition to covering these basic points, respondents 
can be directed to the booklet Introduetion to Type Dynamics 
and Development (Myers &amp; Kirby, 199+), which presents the 
dynamic information in a practical and accessible way. 


Factors That Influence 
Accuracy of Self-Report 


Each stage of the interpretive process gives information 
that the respondent can consider and use in evaluating the 
accuracy of his or her type. In some cases, there is instant 
recognition of the correctness of the results. For these peo- 
ple, most of the time spent on interpretation will be used in 
presenting type examples and practical applications. Other 
individuals have doubts about their type, and the steps 
described above are designed to bring out new information 
that may help resolve questions about which is their best- 
fit type. 

Throughout the explanation process, the interpreter 
should keep in mind possible reasons why the MBTI results 
may not be an accurate estimate of that persons type. The 
working assumption of type theory is that each person has 
innate, or “true,” preferences. It is important to be aware of 
reasons why type preferences may be incorrectly reported. 
These include the following: 


B There may be a lack of differentiation of type. Such a 
lack occurs more often in young people whose develop- 
ment into a type may still be in the stage of exploration 
and experimentation. For example, during adolescence 
there is great value placed on many of the qualities asso- 
ciated with Extraversion. An adolescent who is trying to 
"fit in" may therefore answer the Indicator as an Ex- 
traverted type when in fact Introversion is his or her nat- 
ural and comfortable preference. 

B [here may be difficulty in choosing between the expec- 
tations ol ones parents and one’s own preferences. For 
cxample, a Sensing type raised in a family in which the 
parents and siblings preter Intuition may learn to value 
Intuitive qualities over Sensing qualities, attempt to 
develop those qualities, and therefore answer as an Intu- 
itive type on the Indicator. 


W The respondent may feel torn between demands of work 
and his or her own preferences. This source of bias can 
be greatly minimized through giving careful instructions 
to respondents when the MBTI is administered. 

B The respondent may be in a life crisis and may not be 
using his or her typical mode of coping. Giving the Indi- 
cator when the client is experiencing unusual distress is 
generally not recommended. 


Aa The MBTI may have been administered in a situation 


involving authority (e.g., for employment); sometimes 
respondents answer questions in terms of their percep- 
tion of that authority's preferences instead of their own. 

B [he words used to explain the MBTI may have been mis- 
understood, and the respondent may have rejected the 
terms because of an assumed negative connotation, as 
when Introversion is interpreted to imply neurotie or shy, 
when Judging is interpreted to mean judgmental, or when 
Feeling is interpreted to mean overemotional. When ex- 
plaining the MBTI, you may need to repeat a discussion of 
the meanings of thesc terms in the context of the MBTI. 

B The individual may have been influenced by perceived 
social pressures. Such an effect is most likely to occur with 
the T-F dichotomy if the respondent equates Thinking 
with masculinity and Feeling with femininity. 

B The respondent may have believed that the type descrip- 
tion must fit his or her own characteristics perfectly to be 
accepted. Carefully explaining, before providing MBTI 
results, that there are a variety of individual differences 
within any particular type should minimize this effect. 

B The respondent may be in a growth period in which pre- 
viously unused or unappreciated processes are being 
developed. During such a period, there may be uncer- 
tainty about previously trusted processes as the less 
developed processes become differentiated. For exam- 
ple, during midlife a dominant Feeling type may become 
fascinated with logically analyzing life problems and cor- 
respondingly be less interested in solving problems by 
maintaining harmony. 


All self-report instruments are subject to the kinds of 
effects described above and to many other effects not 
intended by those who administer them. Since the MBTI 
dichotomizes responses, and since the theory postulates 
"true preferences," the MBTI interpreter should be particu- 
larly careful during each stage of the interpretation to help 
individuals discover for themselves which pole of cach 
dichotomy best fits them. 

It is not necessary for the respondent to discover “true 
preferences" during the introductory session, but it is neces- 
sary for the interpreter to set the stage for the search. A key 
tool during interpretation is the full-page type description. 
Any qualms or demurs should be taken seriously. With 
experience, an interpreter can judge which of the above 
steps are necessary for a particular client and which may be 
omitted; however, the issues and strategies discussed above 
should be kept in mind during any interpretation. 


Interpreting the Preference Clarity 
Index and Preference Clarity 
Categories on the MBTI 


Quantitative interpretation of MBTI results as an indication 
that a respondent has “more” or “less” of a preference is 
incorrect. Such a practice is the most pervasive source of 
misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the MBTI. Un- 
like numerical scores on trait instruments that are designed 
to reflect an “amount” of the trait being measured, the 
MBTI preferenee clarity index (pci) is designed to show 
only how sure the respondent is that she or he prefers onc 
pole of the dichotomy over its opposite. For forms that pre- 
ceded the current Form M of the Indicator, the term prefer- 
cnce score was used rather than preference clarity index. See 
Chapter 7 for the rationale for the change in designation 
and for the details of this index. The number associated 
with an MBTI preference, whether it is the previous prefer- 
ence score or the current preference clarity index, is most 
appropriately interpreted as providing information about 
the likelihood that the preference has been correctly re- 
ported. Any questions concerning a preference clarity index 
should focus on this meaning and be used for joint explo- 
ration of the preference at issue. 

An alternative to reporting the pci itself is to present the 
preference clarity eategory (“slight,” “moderate,” “clear,” 
“very clear”) to the respondent instead. The meanings of 
these categories are discussed on the next page, but first 
some cautions are in order. 





The preference clarity index is an estimate of relative confi- 
dence that a preference has been accurately identified. Any 
other quantitative interpretation of MBTI results is incorrect 
and leads to misunderstanding and misinterpretation. 





Clarity Does Not Imply Excellence 
or Type Development 


The most frequent error that oecurs regarding the numeri- 
cal portion of MBTI results is assuming that clarity of pref- 
erence implies excellence; it is incorrect to assume that a 
person with a preference clarity index of N 30 has a better 
command of Intuition than a person with N 15. A larger 
number simply means that the respondent, when forced to 
choose, is more clear about what he or she prefers. While it 
frequently happens (and it is reasonable to expect) that 
those who report clear preferences (a) exercise them more 
and thus (b) are more likely to have developed the skills 
associated with those preferences and, further, that they (c) 
are more likely to develop the traits and habits associated 
with exercise of those skills, this sequence may have been 
interrupted in any given individual. For example, a person 
may answer the Indicator to reflect a very clear preference 


Interpreting Results of the MBTI and Verifying Type — 121 





for Thinking as a way of making decisions. However, for 
unknown reasons, his or her actual decision making may 
vacillate unpredictably and inappropriately between Think- 
ing and Feeling, perhaps resulting in generally poor decision 
making. Another person with the same very clear preference 
for Thinking may use this preferred process to make gener- 
ally consistent and satisfying decisions. The preferenee clar- 
ity index lor each of these individuals by itself does not 
permit us to determine each individuals inadequacy or 
excellence in using the Thinking function. 

For the same reasons cited regarding "excellence," pref- 
erence clarity does not imply such concepts as degree of 
type development, or how “differentiated” a person is, or 
how well or poorly he or she will perform any given task or 
succeed or lail in any occupational setting. The use of pref- 
erence clarity indexes to make such inferences is inappro- 
priate, misleading, and damaging. 


Use of the MBTI Step II to Clarify Preferences 


The meaning of more and less clear preferences on all the 
MBTI dichotomies must be interpreted with caution, espe- 
cially in light of the information available regarding the 
components or subscales that contribute meaning to each 
dichotomy. These components are elicited through the scor- 
ing of Form K of the MBTI, which yields the Step H 
Expanded Interpretive Report (EIR) mentioned in Chapter 
5. The subscales associated with each MBTI dichotomy do 
not neeessarily identify all the possible components of the 
underlying type construet, nor are such known and poten- 
tial components equivalent to the complexity and breadth 
of Jungs constructs. Rather, each dichotomy not only is 
hypothesized to be greater than the sum of its identified parts 
but also is assumed to be influeneed by each of the other 
dichotomies and their particular combination. However, 
observed patterns of subscale scores within each dichotomy 
can provide useful information about the clarity of a respon- 
dents preference for one or the other pole of a dichotomy. 
For example, it is fairly common for respondents to have one 
or two subscale seores associated with the domain opposite 
to that of the underlying preference. Thus a person may have 
an underlying preference for Sensing, yet her Step I] pattern 
of subscales may show her to be habitually using one or 
more components of Intuition. Such an individual may 
answer enough items in the Intuitive direction that a low 
preference clarity index for Sensing may result. 

A detailed description of the Step II EIR subscales and 
their relationship to type preferences is beyond the scope of 
this manual. A complete description of this scoring system 
will be available in Manual for the Step H Expanded Interpic- 
tive Report, which is in press. In interpreting MBTI results, 
however, it is important to bear in mind that there are sev- 
eral alternative explanations for varying preference clarity 
indexes. An important possibility is a pattern of using spe- 
cife components of an underlying prelerence in a manner 


122 Administration and Interpretation 


— 


that affects one’s preference clarity on a dichotomy. The tech- 
nical features associated with the pei can be found in Chapter 
7. The following guidelines for Form M ol the Indicator 
should therefore be viewed in such a context. 


Guidelines for Interpreting the 
Preference Clarity Categories 


The guidelines provided here are best used as aids to assist 
the type verification process. They provide information 
regarding the confidence one may have that a respondent 
holds the preference he or she has reported on each 
dichotomy of the Indicator. 


Very Clear Preferences (pci 26-30) Respondents who 
report very clear preferences (roughly a pci of 26 or more) 
usually agree that they hold the preferences reported by 
the MBTI and often most of the characteristics 
that accompany those preferences. It can be useful to 
inquire during the interpretation session about how the 
person uses the less-preferred function or attitude when 
the situation demands it. For example, one might discuss 
how a respondent who reports a very clear preference for 
P meets required deadlines. Do not be surprised to find 
some respondents who are always on time despite their 
clear preference for Perceiving. 


Clear Preferences (pci 16-25) When an individuals pci is 
16 through 25, there is a reasonable probability that the 
respondent holds and acts on the reported preference and 
many of the attitudes and skills that accompany it. 


Moderate Preferences (pci 6—15) With a preference 
clarity index of 6 through 15, the respondent may still most 
often agree with the description of the reported preference, 
but the interpreter should inquire whether the inter- 
pretation fits and should be alert for questions about pre- 
ference during the explanation. It is quite likely that such 
an individual makes habitual use of one or more aspects of 
the opposite pole of the dichotomy and may spontaneously 
describe such use. 


Slight Preferences (pci 1—5) When the prefcrence clarity 
index is 1 through 5, a change of one or two questions could 
change the letter designation. The respondent has cs- 
sentially “split the vote." The interpreter should carefully 
inquire about whether the reported preference is correct for 
the person. The interpretation and verification methods 
described earlier in the chapter will prove helpful here. For 
some people, less clear preferences reflect discomfort and 
dissatisfaction in using both domains of a dichotomy. For 
example, a slight T-F preference may be associated with a 
report of trouble in knowing whether “to follow my head or 
my heart.” In many cases, however, such a result may be 
affected by the consistent and comfortable exercise of 


Table 6.2 Percentage of Respondents on 
Form M at Each Level of Preference 

Preference 

Clarity E-I S-N T-F J-P 
Slight 23 21 28 22 
Moderate 43 42 42 37 
Clear 25 28 21 26 
Very Clear 9 9 9 14 





Note: N = 3,036. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


particular component parts of the T-F dichotomy, as de- 
scribed by Step II subscales. For example, it is not uncom- 
mon for a person who prefers Feeling to also reveal a 
“questioning” approach in decision making (a component of 
Thinking) rather than an “accommodating” approach (the 
opposite component of Feeling). Nevertheless, that person 
still has an underlying preference for the Feeling pole of the 
Thinking-Feeling dichotomy. 

Social demands can also provide different pressures for 
men and women on the T-F dichotomy. Men are encour- 
agcd more toward Thinking activities and women toward 
Feeling activities. In daia reported for Form G in the 1985 
Manual, one-fifth to one-fourth of males and females 
showed slight preferences for all dichotomies but T-F On 
the T-F dichotomy, two-fifths of males preferring Feeling 
and females preferring Thinking reported only slight pref- 
erences on T-E In developing Form M, concern for issues 
around the T-F dichotomy led to the elimination of items 
that produced different responses for men and women. 
Items showing significant gender differences were also 
eliminated in Form M for the three other MBTI di- 
chotomies. Because gender effects appear to be most perva- 
sive for T-E it is useful to inquire whether less clarity for 
a respondent indicates clear preferences that seem less 
clear to the respondent because he or she answered ina 
socially expected manner, or whether the lesser clarity 
indicates a conflict between sex role expectations and type 
preferences. 

Interpreters and respondents who do not adequately 
understand type theory and the MBII will sometimes inter- 
pret less clarity as advantageous, interpreting the “splitting 
of votes” as indicating good command of both domains. 
Such an interpretation is theoretically unsound in an 
approach that emphasizes the adaptive advantages of spe- 
cialization of mental processes. In addition, there are no 
research data available that support a notion that “equality” 
of preferences is advantageous. 

As shown in Table 6.2, people with clarity indexes in the 
“slight” category are not uncommon, ranging from 21% on 
the S-N dichotomy to 28% on the T-F dichotomy. Although 


the table does not give a breakdown of clarity of preference 
by the poles of the dichotomies, analysis indicates a fairly 
even distribution with the regard to the poles of E-I and T-F 
dichotomies. The percent of people reporting an E prefer- 
ence who fall in each prelerence clarity category is about 
equal to those reporting an I preference, and the same is 
true for the I-F dichotomy. However, about twice as many 
people who report a J preference fall into the “clear” and 
“very clear” categories as compared to those who report a P 
preferenee (26.4% versus 13.7%), and about three times as 
many of those reporting an S preference fall into the “very 
clear” and “clear” categories as compared to those report- 
ing an N preference (28% versus 9%). Two factors must be 
considered in attempting to interpret these results. First, 
the data are based on the national sample, which included 
more Sensing and Judging types than Intuitive and Perceiv- 
ing types. Second, the intervals included within the four 
pei categories are different. The “slight” and “very clear” 
categories have 5 intervals each (1-5 and 26-30, respec- 
tively), while the “moderate” and “clear” categories have 
10 intervals each (6-15 and 16-25, respectively). For the 
practitioner, whether the observed differences in the poles 
of S-N and J-P are the result of sampling and/or interval 
influences is not a central concern. The practical implica- 
tions of client differences in preference clarity are the 
important area for those who interpret the MBTI. Practi- 
tioners who can draw on a wide range ol possible "expla- 
nations" that might account for different preference clari- 
ties will be best prepared to help respondents identify their 
best-fit type. 


Comparative Clarity of Dominant 
and Auxiliary Functions 


The 1985 Manual presented data relevant to the hypothesis 
that the dominant function will reasonably be expected to 
show greater clarity of preference than the auxiliary func- 
tion. However, as discussed in Chapter 9, the hypothesis 
itself may not be an appropriate test of type theory. In addi- 
tion, subscale patterns revealed in the MBTI Step II may 
help illuminate sources of differences in clarity for both 
dominant and auxiliary functions. 


Interpreting Results of the MBTI and Verifying Type 123 











Comparison of Phrase Questions 
and VWord-Pair Questions 


The preferences for E-1, S-N, I-E and J-P can be divided 
into that portion that is obtained from the phrase questions 
and the portion elicited by word pairs. Computer reports of 
type results typicallv provide a preference clarity index for 
the total of MBTI responses as well as for the phrase ques- 
tion and word-pair question parts. The statement in the 
1985 Manual that "there is little research dealing with dif- 
ferential responses to Word Pair and Phrase Questions" 
(Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, p. 61) continues to be true at 
this time of manual revision. The single study reviewed at 
that time (Nechworth &amp; Carskadon, 1979) has not stimu- 
lated additional research on this topic. Inferences about the 
possible meaning of phrase and word-pair discrepancies are 
therefore discouraged. In fact, the sections of the profile and 
narrative that reported scores and types for word-pair and 
phrase questions separately are no longer provided in the 
revised computer profile and report. 


Conclusion 


The interpreters role is not to determine the accuracy of the 
MBTI personality inventory. The interpreters task is to pro- 
vide ways in which respondents can understand their best 
and most trustworthy way of functioning. While experience 
generally shows that clear preferences are likely to be seen as 
accurate, the interpreter should be prepared for the occa- 
sional case in which very clearly reported preferences are the 
result of the individuals overreaction to doubts about the 
opposite domain, which may actually be the one the individ- 
ual prefers. There are also cases in which less clear prefer- 
ences are subjectively experienced by respondents as clear 
and consistent. One explanation for this may be the particu- 
lar pattern the individual may show on component parts of 
the underlying type dichotomy. As with all psychological 
instruments, the interpreter should keep in mind that self- 
report from a limited number of questions, no matter how 
carefully validated, cannot completely describe any human 
being. In addition, a small percentage of people may not 
identily with a psychological type perspective of personality. 
For these individuals, some other explanatory approach may 
be more appropriate and meaningful. 


Â P 
bL 
eia TM nee CHS B.A 
19 4! one zi [p^ i p 41 ê r 
( 4 
. | ' 4 i 
&gt; i è B å 
$ 1 Bd bs 
!) "y rs i fi 
i qu 6 ` 54 P Ó 
u j la p 
e 
G in: 3 ie 
: oc } l - d IZ a ê 
è M P f 
E B eui "m 
9 6 i 
amit NES , è »* 
dba Ae in UE se! ? 1 «si 
. 
" = | ‘ie = , ee 4 e c oe 
a Sen T 1. LWIT 
ja N LJ i 
i» ] (x ôs i 4:9 ^, 
E t] PUE sr CEN - 
P Ó $ E 


le ——u- — - dM. imde Se e 


= 
E &gt; 
" 
D A &amp; 


"the 
f isuk "m 
a d - "itv? , 
D 4 pi iw g? 
O E D o L] € m LJ 
fjv k 
ie. Bij E E pé Ip. 
at M m e _ aA ra" Eom 
? 4 
As 7 &gt; mm € 49 tc 
"9 LI y te LI è 
R 7 ê 
fi “nts T4 Y x we HA 4 4» 
i irt) mu wu (MT f » Ç ij 
jat 1.5 T è T Puna | 
L a 2m 
n F "d P wi 5 Me ey a N 
*4 N piss | Di ; t4 í a phy ' 
cf 2 , «© Lig | ia" a. ó » 
Pe 
j i ' d^ 
lá P M i 
j - 
( 
i å 7 (wd (iy A" 
i i taste 1) 
4 ' ‘ A k i n ’ 
d . á 1 
J 
&lt; 


á i ras i 5 0 
' c7 p a - E E B "» i Ww 
oo u Ei PS "2 &gt; 
TE ; 


è &lt; 



























&lt;P"? ns vi. DW ils Mr min 
"iab a vds wiat ah ay Ape oad 
sts oft Wie ewe gu git set 
et cta vt mium sd prii Soc M J-i ET] 
"EN ^hi-euii fh 2c qiie 1 a d pettlt 
jo u$ S^ 1 s qu "T T re 
4 a » Ld , 
Bis pa "y Mic — Ava TM 
ri bla d Ab ad "VW: 
, bari is o a dorta B payin 
eti a KaT iE Se) mi itil ak 
Te i di Matacs L v rw o Vou 
' i?) pt) el ere partt -— 
uiridi sabato i ti; Pil 
"ain i — vid ut? den E 
Ahh ntes pA UA 


(eate vi ph bia * 381. MO 4 
t 


a yv en *£ WO (eris 
ML VEU. J^ 


YAP ein» n Joe 12 diuo v AE 


ue ri ve bis 2" 
"tt 98 agi | oer "armo AN te 
vr» LU. 2 Vivi 
ale i = eo ant. To 
n ae » tS uw su ^ e 


EE 


i 


u aw, V3, lam. Tu "m wt f 
ve TEMUCO oh Os PTO 
bus mE ae "mpm tidin Tar l 
vd qa en i 
d 2 ipe ©) I y A 
mE SAP T a O MC Vie t 
ve " s! tou 
d perii e EBEN T 
(aiu n 3 yl AeA vip ) 
Ty tle WD ee ee 
pb "Puy. a8 Ay A M 
, a Ub TET: 
TI NTH S Pera cd 
y (054,91 al! shia an € WAS 
ai ripae vi de SRM 
~~ maps! dud fes WM iv m 
| — TE qat cru ve 
&amp; int 2» aw ane JL 
"pte era E soca ay 
(ys c6 dimi pho at geins ' Xr 
werd w= a 
ain ogi es slg naa 
4 = Oo Ain. 
ba wd M rhe. ít jo AL 
à | dti P r9 Ree, 2 
» Tu up d 5 2A 


Research IV. 


esearch relevant to the MBTI appears in the three 

chapters of Part IV, which cover construction, relia- 
bility, and validity of the instrument. In addition to the 
standard information that all test manuals provide in these 
areas, issues related to the appropriateness of methods and 
the meaning of results must also be considered in light of 
Jungs theory upon which the instrument is based. These 
issues are an important element in all three chapters of 
Part IV. 


Chapter 7, “Construction and Properties of the MBTI," 
summarizes the lengthy construction efforts of Isabel Briggs 
Myers that produced Forms A through G of the Indicator. 
The same theory-based requirements for these forms were 
addressed in creating Form M, whose items were selected 
using item response theory. As you read Chapter 7, you will 
become aware of the following: 


gm Why all items appear in a forced-choice format and not 
some other format 

gm What is meant by a psychological opposite 

m How item response theory differs from classical test the- 
ory—the approach used in creating previous forms of 
the MBTI 

g The multiple requirements for adding and deleting items 
in creating Form M 

gm Why determining the midpoint on each dichotomy is 
critical 

g Ihe characteristics of the national sample used to create 
Form M 


Chapter 8, “Reliability and Measurement Precision,” 
covers the various ways the reliability of the MBTI has been 
studied. In establishing the reliability of the MBTI, continu- 
ous scores on the four scales are used to produce internal 


126 Research 





consistency and test-retest estimates in a manner that is sim- 
ilar to that used for trait-based instruments. However, the 
most important aspect ol reliability for the MBTI is the con- 
sistency of categorical results—whether the respondent is 
the same type on retest and whether the respondent shows 
consistent results on different parts of the instrument. Chap- 
ter 8 presents reliability evidence from both perspectives. As 
you read Chapter 8, you will become aware of the following: 


B How internal consistency was studied using a “logical 
split-half^ procedure 

B The improvement in reliability of Form M over Form G 

B llow type development inlluences reliability results in 
some samples 

B Why test-retest categorical agreement ean never reach 
100% 

B The “equivalence” of some item response theory terms 
10 familiar classical test theory terms 


In Chapter 9, “Validity,” the emphasis is on research on 
type dynamics and whole types rather than on individual 
dichotomies, whose validity has been well established. 
Establishing the validity of each of the dichotomies was a 
necessary and important aspect of validating the MBTI in 
earlier years. However, an unfortunate consequence of this 
focus was the interpretation of the MBTI as reflecting four 
independent traits—a point of view that was familiar to 
researchers and for which many statistical techniques were 
available. Some evidence for the validity of the four di- 
chotomies that was included in the 1985 Manual appears in 
summary form in this chapter, and new data are also pre- 
sented. The bulk of this chapter, however, consists of evi- 
dence that supports the dichotomous nature of the dimen- 
sions, the interactive effects specified by type dynamics, and 


the clistinctiveness of whole types. As you read Chapter 9, 
you will become aware of the following: 


B Why discontinuity on a scale supports the existence of a 
dichotomy 

E How the different behaviors of the types is one way to 
demonsirate validity 

@ That there are typc-consistent relationships to areas such 
as orientation to time, preference for privacy, anxiety and 
conformity, and specialty choice in medicine 

8 Why multiple dependent variables are needed to study 
whole types 

Æ Two of the ways of studying type dynamics—observer 
ratings and analysis of variance 

8 How uniquc descriptions of whole types by observers 
provide powerful evidence for the distinctiveness of each 


type 


In reading Part IV, readers may note that the same or sim- 
ilar statements or research data appear in more than one 
chapter. In addition, some statements and research evidence 
that are included in the chapters of Part IV may reappear in 
the applications chapters of Part V. There are several reasons 
for thesc repetitions: First, the focus in presenting research 
may differ in two different chapters—a study that provides 
validity evidence may also be informative with regard to reli- 
ability or to applying the MBTI in a particular setting. Sec- 
ond, some readers of this manual may “dip into” one or 
another chapter depending on their particular needs and 
interests rather than reading the chapters in the order in 
which they appear. They therefore may not have come upon 
data that are actually relevant to their interests. Third, some 
information bears repetition simply because it is critical to 
understanding the MBTI in a variety of contexts. 





Construction and 


Properties of the MBTI 


History of the Development of 
Previous MBTI Forms 


Issues in the Construction of 
Previous MBTI Forms 


Item Response Theory 
Selection of Items for Form M 


Development of Scoring 
Procedures for Form M 


Determining the Midpoint 
of the Scales for Form M 


Properties of Form M 


The National Sample and the 
National Representative Sample 


Conclusion 


he purpose of this chapter is to describe the con- 

struction of Form M of the Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor personality inventory. As discussed in Chapter 2 of this 
manual, the construction of Form M followed the same 
general principles as did the construction of the previous 
forms. The goal was to balance the long tradition of the 
Indicator with changes suggested by new psychometric 
approaches. To understand the construction of Form M, 
therefore, it is important to understand how the previous 
forms of the Indicator were developed. 


The challenges involved in constructing the MBTI derive 
from the nature of Car] G. Jungs theory of psychological 
types. These challenges are not typical of most psychologi- 
cal measures because the intent of the Indicator is not to 
measure people or the traits they are said to “have” or pos- 
sess, but rather to sort people into groups to which, in the- 
ory, they already belong. 

All of the forms described in this chapter, including 
Form M, are designed for Step I of the Indicator, which 
involves knowing and understanding a person's type. Step I 
identifies a person's preference on each of four dichotomous 
scales, E-I, S-N, T-F and J-P. The preferences indicated for 
these four scales are then combined to yield a four-letter 
type. As mentioned earlier in this manual, in addition to 
Step I there are two other scoring methods for the MBTI, 
called Step Il and Step IIT. Step II yields the four-letter type 
as well as scores on 20 subscales. Step Ill adds scores on an 
additional seven scales, known as the Comfort-Discomfort 


128 Research 


scales. Construction of Steps 1l and II are not described in 
this chapter; the relevant technical material for these steps 
can be found in their respective manuals (Saunders, 1989, 
1987). 

As outlined briefly in Chapter 2, the construction of the 
MBTI was governed by a working hypothesis: that certain 
valuable differences in normal people result from their pre- 
ferred ways of using perception and judgment. Consonant 
with Jungs theory, using the MBTI to determine preferences 
requires that a person choose between two opposites on 
each of the four scales. Each scale included in Step I scoring 
is therefore a dichotomy. The lour separate scales designed 
to determine a respondents preferences represent the fol- 
lowing four dichotomies: 


Extraversion or Introversion 
Sensing or Intuition 
Thinking or Feeling 


Judging or Perceiving 


The object of the MBTI is to determine the persons prel- 
erence on each of these four dichotomies so that these results 
can be reported to the person as a four-letter type. Although 
the measurement of preferences is currently obtained on 
four individual scales, the results are meant to be interpreted 
as whole types. The assumption is that the whole is greater 
than the sum of the parts. The theoretical rationale for this 
assumption is presented in Chapter 3 in this manual. The 
evidence supporting this claim is presented throughout this 
manual, but particularly in Chapter 9. 


History of the Development 
of Previous MBTI Forms 


[his section summarizes the development of the MBTI, up 
to and including Form J of the instrument. Development 
through Form J occurred in a series of stages, beginning in 
1942, continuing to the publication of Form G in 1977, and 
then culminating in the publication of Form J in 1987. The 
1998 revision and the development of Form M will be 
described in later sections. 


The Initial Stage 


The initial questions developed by Isabel Briggs Myers and 
Katharine Briggs to measure Jungs theory were tested first 
on a small criterion group of about 20 relatives and friends 
whose type preferences seemed to the authors to be clearly 
evident from long acquaintance and from a 20-year period 
of careful observation of behavior. This criterion group was 
made up exclusively of those persons whose preferences 


were clear enough to be manifest consistently in observable 
behavior. This observation convinced the authors that the 
constellation of behaviors and attitudes described for each 
type by Jung could be reliably observed. After an initial 
period of identifying behaviors described by Jung, the 
authors noted additional behaviors and characteristics. 
When a behavior scemed to relate to a specific preference, 
T-F for example, the authors studied its appearance, its 
antecedents and effects, and its occurrence in persons 
thought to prefer thinking or feeling. After repeated obser- 
vations and confirmations or disconfirmations of their hy- 
potheses, they became more sure that (1) certain persons 
did indeed prefer thinking and (2) specific characteristics 
were found to be associated with thinking and could be 
considered derivatives of thinking. Thus, by the time of the 
initial stages of development of the MBTI, Jungs constructs 
had been tested and refined by years of observation. 

Between 1942 and 1944 a large number of potential 
MBTI items were written and validated via the initial crite- 
rion group. The authors’ discussions with respondents also 
revealed ways to change the items so as to capture the 
essence of the differences between the types. From these 
discussions it became clear that the same phrase conveyed 
quite different meanings to different types. 


Forms A and B 


Items that survived the initial validation were collected into 
a set of scales called Form A, and a rearrangement of the 
same items became Form B. The items were tested on pro- 
gressively larger samples. These samples were made up 
mainly of adults because adults were expected to have 
reached higher levels of type development and to therelore 
be clearer about their preferences and better able to report 
them. To remain on a scale, any particular item had to be 
answered by at least 6096 of the people of a given preference 
with the response that was designed for people of that pref- 
erence. When using this method, a persons preference was 
determined by his or her responses to all of the items on 
that scale. 


Form C 


Additional item analysis led to the creation of Form C. One 
criterion for the inclusion of items in Form C was that a 
question having a high validity for one dichotomy was 
excluded if it also had a high validity for another dichotomy. 
For example, an item would be excluded if it correlated well 
with both the E-1 and S-N dichotomies. It was necessary 
to keep the scales as uncorrelated as possible because other- 
wise a strong preference for a scale would distort the evi- 
dence for another scale. The Form C items were intercorre- 
lated first on 248 adult men and later on 214 adult men. The 
first intercorrelation had a range of -.17 (E-l x T-F) to .18 
(E-I x S-N) with a mean of .1 1. The second intercorrelation 


had a range of —.14 (E-I x T-F) to .19 (E-I x S-N) with a 
mean of .09. 

Internal consistency analyses of Forms A and B had 
made it clear that responses differed in popularity. To allow 
for unequal popularity and for omissions, responses to 
items on Form C were weighted. A prediction ratio (see 
below) was substituted for previous item-test consistency 
analvses. PRU MED. ARTI that the re- 
E d at all, would be given in 

a: rea limit to retain an item was 
a xm ratio of .60. Form C consisted of items from 
Forms A and B that survived this analysis, plus one new 
item and six reworded items. 

In 1947 a Form C3 was developed that incorporated 
item weighting that allowed better differentiation of indi- 
viduals scoring near 0. Items were weighted as a function of 
the prediction ratio for the item. The prediction ratio shows 
the probability that any response is given in accord with 
total scale score (ie., the probability that a response 
designed for Js is given by Judging types and not given by 
Perceiving types). For each question, then, the (A) answer 
and the (B) answer have separate prediction ratios. The for- 
mula used to calculate the prediction ratio is shown below 
for both responses to a J-P item. 





PR for item J) = Percent of J subjects giving]; response 
(76 of J subjects giving J| response) 
+ (% of P subjects giving Jj response) 


PR for item P = Percent of P subjects giving Pj response 
(76 of P subjects giving P| response) 
+ (% of] subjects giving P, response) 


These prediction ratios were used to create weights for each 
response to each item. At this stage the weights were 0 for 
PR less than .60, I for PR .60 to .69, and 2 for PR .70 or 
greater. 


Form D 


The years 1956 to 1958 constituted a second major period 
of development, in preparation for the 1962 publication of 
the MBTI as a research instrument by Educational Testing 
Service. Over 200 new items, including word-pair ques- 
tions, were submitted to a small group of people of known 
type who were familiar with the Indicator. Items that sur- 
vived this analysis were submitted to 120 men and women 
who had taken Form C. The more promising items remain- 
ing after item analysis (about 130) were appended to Form 
C to create an experimental Form D. 

When items were evaluated by the small group of people 
of known type, it was found that some people were more 
able than others to recognize their own general tendencies. 
If you ask Introverts, “Under such and such conditions, do 
you tend to do (A) or (B)?” they are likely to single out the 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 129 


key word in (A) and the key word in (B), weigh them 
against each other, and decide which reaction is most like 
them, in accord with how the questions were designed to be 
answered. On the other hand, Extraverts respond to this 
question by harking back to the last time they were in a 
similar situation and remembering how they behaved. The 
Extraverts' answer thus reflects behavior on a single occa- 
sion surrounded by extraneous contextual factors. 

While writing items for Form D, the authors realized 
that the way to get respondents to concentrate on key 
words was to give them the key words and nothing else, 
which formed the word pairs. For example, here are three 
word pairs: 


build A B invent 
benefits A B blessings 
impulse A. B decision 


The response to the word pairs indicated that while a 
number of them had low face-validity, they worked ex- 
tremely well in separating people into the correct cate- 
gories. Word pairs also have a number of other advantages 
over other types of questions, including the following: 


B Less distracting 

B Less subject to varied interpretation, personal reticence, 
and conscious or unconscious censorship 

B More quickly read and answered, making it possible to 
have more items without increasing the administration 
time 


The addition of word pairs almost doubled the number ol 
valid items in Form D. 

Prior to the 1956-58 development, all analyses were 
based on administration of the questions to adults. A series 
of younger-age samplings were then conducted. Younger 
individuals were presumably less advanced in type develop- 
ment and less clear about their preferences. Each sampling 
was evaluated to determine the extent to which items 
became less efficient as samples became younger. 

An internal consistency analysis was done with 385 
graduate students. As a result, the lower limit of the predic- 
tion ratio required for retention of an item was raised from 
.60 to .63. New items meeting this criterion were added, 
and weaker items were dropped. 

An analysis with undergraduate students showed only 
slightly lower prediction ratios. The wording of a number of 
the older items was simplified and used in Forms DO and DI 
with three high school samples. When the simpler wording 
produced prediction ratios above .63, the revised wordings 
were adopted in the final experimental form, D2. Reworded 
items not meeting this criterion were dropped; or, in a few 
cases, an item was returned to its earlier wording. 

In 1957 a large internal consistency analysis of Form D 
was conducted using a sample of 2,573 Pennsylvania 11th- 
and 12th-grade males in college preparatory courses and a 
similar sample of females. In order to prevent a bias in favor 


130 Research 


of any particular type, a sample of 200 males and 200 
females of each type was drawn from this population. 
Because people of different types differ in their liking for 
items predictive of their preferences, it was important that 
weights assigned for types occurring less frequently in the 
population not be influenced by weightings derived from 
more frequent types. For types with sufficient numbers, a 
sample was drawn equally from the upper and the lower half 
of the students class. Priority was given to overachievers and 
underachievers to diminish the difference in intelligence 
between more and less competent students. 

Items were evaluated separately by gender and by type. 
To correct for differences in type frequency, responses for 
each type were calculated and averaged by the proportion 
of that type responding in a particular manner. This proce- 
dure was followed in order to give the rarer Introvert types 
equal weight with the more numerous Extraverts. In addi- 
tion to the prediction ratios, tetrachoric item-test correla- 
tions were computed and used as a check on item selection. 


Forms E and F 


The surviving items became Forms E and E which were 
identical except that Form F contained unscored experi- 
mental items. Item weights that had been started in Form 
C3 were used in these lorms and made more stringent. For 
the first time a tie-breaking formula was adopted, and the 
preference scores were used instead of percentages to denote 
the strength of preferences. Form F was used in the large 
samples collected in preparation for publication by Educa- 
tional Testing Service in 1962. In the early 1970s Form E 
was phased out and Form F became the standard form. 


Form G 


Between [975 and 1977, almost 20 years after the large- 
scale data collection in preparation for the publication of 
Form E a new standardization of items was carried out. The 
new analyses seemed appropriate to ensure that cultural 
changes had not decreased the utility of items and to make 
some minor modifications that two decades of experience 
had suggested were desirable. One goal ol the restandard- 
ization was to investigate at what age schoolchildren could 
validly take the MBTI. 

The new standardization was based on 1,114 males and 
1,11] females in grades 4 through 12 in three public 
schools in Bethesda, Maryland, and in four private schools 
in the suburbs of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The analyses 
also included a rescoring of a sample of 3,362 University of 
Florida freshmen tested in 1972 and 1973. A Maryland sub- 
sample of 1,101 11th- and 12th-grade students was compa- 
rable to the sample used for the original Form F item analy- 
ses, consisting largely of college preparatory students of 
above-average sociocconomic status. 

Table 7.1 shows the median item-to-scale correlations 
for five samples for Form G. The item-test correlations and 


Table 7.1 Median Item-Test Correlations 
for Form G 

Sample N Median r 
Maryland | lth and [2th graders 1,101 .6| 
lOth and | Ith graders (two schools) 192 6l 
8th and 9th graders (four schools) 360 .58 
6th and 7th graders (five schools) 309 "35 
4th and 5th graders (four schools) 264 .48 


prediction ratios held up well, even for younger students. 
The utility of items did not diminish, and most items func- 
tioned better at the elementary school level than had been 
anticipated. 

As a result of the analyses of the restandardization sam- 
ples, the scoring weights for the T-F scale were modified 
for Form E and a new revision of the MBTI, Form G, was 
published in 1977. Form G eliminated 38 research items 
not previously scored for type in Form F added one new 
item, and dropped two items that no longer met the criteria 
for inclusion. Some items were modified to eliminate ambi- 
guity or awkward alternatives. Items were rearranged so 
that all the scored items preceded unscored items. The 
rearrangement put the most predictive items at the begin- 
ning so that a usable approximation of type could be 
obtained if the first 50 questions were completed. 

When Form G was introduced, Form F was still avail- 
able, although primarily used as a research form, and the 
weights for Form F items were therefore changed to match 
those of Form G. Thus, when scored for type, the 1977 
Form F and Form G were essentially interchangeable. 


Form G Self-Scorable 


The MBTI is often used in workshop settings where it is dil- 
ficult if not impossible to administer the instrument, collect 
the answer sheets, and then send them in for computer 
scoring prior to the workshop. Even if the hand-scoring 
templates are used, it is time-consuming and often inconve- 
nient to score large numbers of Indicators on-site during a 
workshop. For these reasons a self-scorable version of 
Form G was devised. 

The first self-scorable form, developed in 1983, was 
called the Abbreviated Version (Form AV) of the MBTI. It 
contained the first 50 items from Form G (which best pre- 
dict to the total scale scores) in a format that permitted 
self-scoring and provided some interpretive information 
for the client. Form AV did not provide different weights 
for men and women on the T-F scale. It was recom- 
mended that Form AV be used only for group situations 
where time pressures preclude administration and scoring 
of Form G and when maximum type accuracy is less 
important. A study reported by Kaiser (1981) suggested 


that these items could act as a "surrogate" for the full set of 
Form G items. Initial studies of Form AV confirmed this 
finding and suggested that Form AV was a reasonable short 
form lor Form G. However, a number of later studies of 
Form AV (Macdaid, 1984b; Most, 1984) suggested that the 
form was less reliable than Form G. 

In response to these findings, Form AV was discontinued 
and a new self-scorable form of the MBTI was created—the 
MBTI Form G self-scorable. This form used all 94 of the 
scored items from the standard Form G. Since it contains 
exactly the same items and is scored using exactly the same 
weights as are used to arrive at the four-letter type on the 
standard Form G, the results from the two instruments are 
the same. The Form G sell-scorable and the standard Form 
G have the same reliability and validity, since they use the 
same items and scoring weights. 


Step Il and Step Ill 


In 1987 an advanced scoring system was developed for the 
MBTI. An early version of this scoring system was devel- 
oped decades earlier by Isabel Briggs Myers in collaboration 
with Mary H. McCaulley but was never published. Myers 
original work was expanded upon and published as the 
Type Differentiation Indicator (Saunders, 1987). A new form 
of the MBTI was created at this time, Form J, which con- 
tained all 290 items written by Myers that had survived her 
previous item analyses. When Form J is scored using this 
new system, now called Step III, it yields 20 subscales (5 
under each of the four dichotomous preference scales) plus 
7 scales called Comfort-Discomfort scales. 

This was followed in 1989 by a scoring system that pro- 
duced only the 20 subscales and not the more clinically rele- 
vant Comfort-Discomfort scales. This system was originally 
published as the Expanded Analysis Report (Saunders, 
1989). A new form was created at this time, Form K, con- 
taining 131 items that were needed to score for type as well 
as for the 20 subscales and a number of research items. This 
scoring system is now called Step II. 


Issues in the Construction 
of Previous MBTI Forms 


During the development of MBTI forms through Form G, a 
number of problems were confronted that have implica- 
tions for understanding the nature of the instrument. These 
include social desirability, weighting for gender differences, 
locating the midpoint of the scales, and breaking ties. Some 
ol these problems, like the issue of social desirability, are 
shared by most psychological and educational tests. Others, 
such as how to determine the true midpoint of the scales, 
are unique to the MBTI because of its typological nature. 
Although these problems are generally handled differently 


Construction and Properties ofthe MBT]? 131 





on Form M, they are documented here for users of Form G 
and because they provide a check on important issues that 
need to be faced in future development of the instrument. 


Social Desirability 


Alf test developers must face the fact that people respond to 
some items in certain ways not because those responses 
reflect whatever psychological characteristic the item has 
been designed to tap but rather because those responses are 
more popular or socially desirable in the culture. To the 
extent that this happens, the item becomes more a measure 
of social desirability than a measure of the characteristic of 
interest. 

Beginning with the development of Form C, the predic- 
tion ratio formula described earlier in this chapter was used 
to control for the social desirability of each item response 
on the MBTI. The prediction ratio gives the “goodness” of 
the response, that is, the relationship of the item to all the 
items for that preference. In order for a response to a ques- 
tion to appear on the scoring keys, the prediction ratio must 
be .63 or above for a weight of 1, or .72 for a weight of 2, 
and the item popularity for the opposite preference (i.e., the 
percentage of individuals with the opposite preference giv- 
ing that response) must be below .50. In this manner the 
formula takes social desirability into account. 

The denominator of the formula gives a measure of the 
popularity of the response. If the second term in the 
denominator of the formula goes above .50, the response 
has been given by more than half of those for whom that 
choice was not intended; thus it is overpopular (i.e., more 
sociallv desirable) and is likely to do more harm than it is 
worth by displacing people at the center of the scale. A 
response rejected by the above criteria would be given a 0 
weight. Some responses with 0 weight were retained in vari- 
ous forms of the Indicator to provide counters to weighted 
responses, for other purposes such as their utility on a spe- 
cial scale, or for future use in case the social desirability of 
the items changes. 

For about one-third of the scored questions on Forms F 
and G, prediction ratios were similar for both responses, 
and both responses were given the same weight. [In another 
third of the questions, the responses differed somewhat in 
popularity; in these items, one response was weighted I and 
the other 2, based on the prediction ratio. In the final third 
of items, one response was much more popular than the 
other; these questions were given 0 weight for the popular 
response and 1 or 2 depending on the prediction ratio for 
the other response. 

Items had different response distributions for each of the 
16 types; thus a separate analysis was carried out for each 
type belore the first weighted scoring in 1946 and again 
before publication of Form F The popularity of each 
response was tabulated separately for each of the 16 types 
to guard against extreme variation and to give equal repre- 
sentation to the less frequent types. 


132 Research 


Weighting for Gender Differences 


Throughout the development of the MBTI, all item analyses 
were computed separately for males and females. In the first 
item analysis of 114 males and 110 females (all adults, 
mostly college graduates), it was discovered that some 
questions were valid only for one gender. The second item 
analysis also found gender differences in item validity. In 
developing Form C, only items that were valid for both gen- 
ders were retained. 

In the early forms separate keys lor males and females 
were used for E-I, S-N, T-E and J-P. Beginning with Forms 
E and F the same keys were used for both genders because 
item analyses showed that lor both genders item popularity 
and prediction ratios were comparable on E-1, S-N, and J-P. 

On the T-F scale it was evident that females, even those 
who in their behavior and attitudes indicated a clear prefer- 
ence for Thinking, had a greater tendency to give certain 
Feeling responses than did males. The difference was 
ascribed either to the possibility that certain Feeling 
responses were more socially desirable for females than for 
males, or to the effect of social training. Separate weights 
were assigned to T-F items for each sex, based on the pre- 
diction ratios for each item, with checks that the criterion 
groups were assigned the correct preference. 

Numerous studies in the late 1950s and early 1960s con- 
firmed the weightings and the division point on T—F, which 
tended to produce, among unselected groups of males, a 
distribution of about 60% T and 40% E The females distri- 
butions were about one-third T and two-thirds E From the 
mid-1960s to the mid-1970s the distributions on the T-F 
scale showed large changes, while the distributions of the 
other scales remained stable. A 1972 study of University of 
Florida freshmen produced only 44% T among males and 
30% among females. Almost identical distributions were 
obtained with the 1975 high school samples used to 
restandardize the MBTI. In other words, the incidence of Ts 
had dropped for both males and females. 

One might conclude that Ts were a vanishing species at 
the time of the reweighting or that social/cultural changes 
have altered the popularity of responses in the Thinking- 
Feeling domain. The latter interpretation seems compatible 
with a number of sociological and psychological commen- 
taries, which suggested that Feeling responses might be 
more acceptable or more popular among young Americans 
than they were 20 years earlier. 

In the restandardization samples for Form G, item-test 
correlations and prediction ratios were computed, follow- 
ing precisely the same system as in earlier item analyses. No 
changes were required lor the E-1, S-N, and J-P scales. 
However, Feeling response choices had become more popu- 
lar and therefore lost some of their weighting. Thinking 
responses, some of which were formerly penalized for over- 
popularity, were less popular and therefore gained added 
weight for that response. 


With the restandardized weights used on Form G, the 
high school male sample contained 61% T and the female 
sample contained 3096 T. This was comparable to the earlier 
distributions. A rescoring of the University of Florida sam- 
ple yielded 61% T for males and 30% T for females, also 
comparable to earlier data. 


Omissions 


Omissions are permitted in the instructions of the Indicator 
in the belief that greater validity is achieved by the elimina- 
tion of doubtful answers. Type can then be indicated by 
item responses a person is reasonably sure about, uncon- 
taminated by guessing. In practice there typically are few 
omissions. More than 62% of the respondents in a large 
Center for Applications of Psychological Type databank 
sample answered all the questions on Form G, and over 
80% had fewer than three omissions. 

Research with other psychological measures has estab- 
lished individual differences in response styles, including 
acquiescence or general willingness to concur. On the MBTI 
there is no option to say “No” directly because of the forced- 
choice format, so a person who is unable or unwilling to con- 
cur can omit an item. A few people (particularly Introverted 
Thinking tvpes, who tend not to subscribe unreservedly to 
any statement short of a mathematical equation) may omit 
quite a number ol responses. Users of Form G answer sheets 
should examine them for omitted items before scoring. The 
computer-scored narratives and profiles for Form G contain 
a section showing the number of omitted items per scale. 
Inquiry during the interpretation session into the reasons the 
client omitted specific questions can provide useful verifica- 
tion information. 


Locating the Midpoint of the Scales 


In developing an indicator based on Jungs theory two addi- 
tional problems need to be solved. The first problem is 
whether each dichotomy represents two different kinds of 
people, each holding to a separate preference. If there are 
two kinds of people for each scale, is the division point 
between the groups at the point where the two groups can 
be most clearly separated? 

Jungs theory hypothesizes preferences for opposite 
inner dispositions that cannot be thwarted without damage 
to the individuals well-being. Accurately sorting people into 
the correct category on each ol the four dichotomous type 
constructs is therefore an important goal for the Indicator. 

There is a second problem that must be solved. A self- 
report instrument that aims to accomplish the identifica- 
tion of Jungian types through questions and their resultant 
scales also has the unique problem of locating the division 
point, so that the two categories of people are separated 
with maximum accuracy. 

Thus there are two strong reasons why the division point 
should be as sharp and accurate as possible: (1) to identify 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 133 





the two different groups with maximum accuracy and (2) 
to use these distinctions to obtain evidence as to whether 
the preferences are, as postulated by theory, dichotomous. 

In Form A, where all items had equal weight, the divi- 
sion point was the point on a given scale at which half the 
items were answered for each pole. By definition this point 
was the boundary between people showing one preference 
and people showing the opposite preference. The only pos- 
sible check was to see whether the people of known type 
were correctly classified. From that time on, whenever the 
scoring was changed by dropping or adding iteins or by 
assigning double weight or 0 weight to responses, care was 
taken not to add more overall weight to one pole of the 
scale than to the other, lest the distribution of scores shift. 
Up until the completion of Form C, the people of known 
type were rescored at each step to make sure that changes 
would not shift them to the wrong pole. 

Throughout the construction of the MBTI assessment 
tool, numerous steps were taken to deal with the issue of 
dichotomies and the division points. These included (1) 
permitting omissions to help avoid the effects of random 
guessing, (2) allowing for omissions in the scoring lormu- 
las, (3) giving lower weightings lor overpopular items and 
higher weightings for the more discriminating responses, 
and (4) using inclusive groups rather than extreme groups 
in the item analyses. 

Another technique useful in determining the true mid- 
point is plotting MBTI preferences against an external depen- 
dent variable. In order to pinpoint true 0, the dependent 
variable needs to be sensitive to the slightest indication of 
a preference, so that at the point where the preference 
reverses, the plotted line will show a discontinuity in level as 
well as Cor in place of) a disparity in slope. In addition, the 
sample needs to be very large to stabilize the group means 
and to make the discontinuity visible and statistically signifi- 
cant. An example of this technique for identilying the divi- 
sion point is illustrated by the measures taken to correct the 
E-l division point when it became displaced. 


Relocating the E-l Division Point 
Using Grade Point Average 


When the scoring for Form F was almost completed, the 
0 point on E-1 was found to have shilted toward the 
Extravert pole. The evidence was an unprecedented major- 
ity of Introverts when the Pennsylvania High School sam- 
ple was rescored with the new weights (see the 1985 Man- 
ual, Appendix B, for a description of this sample). To 
correct the error, external evidence was needed to find the 
transition on the dichotomy between the Extraverts and 
the Introverts. 

During the development of Form C, the ycars-of- 
college variable had shown a satisfactory discontinuity on 
E-l. This suggested that, as theory predicts, a preference 
for Introversion is related to interest and/or performance 


in academics. This was supported by the high percentage 
of Introverts in college populations. It therefore seemed 
reasonable that the intelligence measures for the Pennsyl- 
vania High School sample (5,025 males and 4,516 
females) and the grade point average (standardized within 
each class) for the college preparatory courses (3,303 
males and 2,511 females) might exhibit discontinuities 
that would indicate the location of the E-I division point 
(Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). 

The Pennsylvania High School sample was rescored 
with the new E-l division point, and the new location was 
tested by plotting IQ scores separately for males and 
females. For males the break, slight but evident because of 
the large size in the sample, came between the first and sec- 
ond of the groups with the three linked scores. This was 
the point where the division point for the E-I scale was 
finally established. 

lt should be noted that the echange in level between E 
and I was very small in all these analyses, only about .25 
standard deviations in grade point average and about 2 
points in IQ. For such small differences to be visible, sam- 
ples of 4,000 to 5,000 are needed. 


Breaking lies 


In the early stages of the MBTIS development, equal points 
for the poles of the same scale were designated by an “x”; 
thus the type might be designated IxTJ, or ENFx. With 
Form E a tie-breaking formula was adopted, on the sugges- 
tion of Frederick R. Kling of Educational Testing Service. 
The formula involves finding the difference between the 
points for each pole, doubling the difference, and then 
adding a point if either 1, N, E or P is the larger pole, or sub- 
tracting a point if cither E, S, T, or J is the larger pole. This 
tie-breaking formula is also used on Form G. 

The logic behind adding a point to the I, N, or P prefer- 
ences is that these are the less frequent types in the popu- 
lation. If a person is that close to the preference (zero dif- 
ference), there is probably some environmental response 
pressure from the “majority” preference. This pressure can 
result in answers conforming to the majority and contrary 
to true preferences; thus the persons *true" type is probably 
l, N, or P. The rationale for tie breaking on the T-F scale 
was somewhat different. In this culture males more fre- 
quently prefer and are socialized toward T; females more 
frequently prefer and are socialized toward E On the possi- 
bility that the weighting of the scales might have overcor- 
rected for social desirability, tie scores assigned males to T 
and females to E However, when the new Form F keys were 
published in 1978, the scoring was simplified by adding one 
point to the male Thinking key (i.e., all males get one extra 
point toward Thinking). This procedure provided insurance 
against possible overcorrection and allowed the tie-breaking 
formula to be simplified so that for both males and females 
one point is subtracted for T and one added for E 


134 Research 


Item Response Theory 


The construction of Form M of the MBTI was based on the 
same assumptions and followed the same general principles 
that guided construction ol the earlier forms ol the Indica- 
tor. The construction of Form M, however, also involved 
changes in how items were selected, the method used to 
score lor type, and how the midpoint of the scales was 
determined. Before describing how these three primary 
issues were handled in the development of Form M for the 
1998 revision, it is necessary to provide an introduction to 
item response theory (IRT) because IRT was used to accom- 
plish all three of the major construction tasks. As the name 
implies, IRT is a theory about how item responses are 
related to the underlying construct in the individual that is 
presumed to produce those responses. 

Item response theory has gained considerable popularity 
in recent years as a method for developing and evaluating 
assessment instruments. This is partly due to the fact that it 
is useful for constructing and evaluating many different 
kinds of instruments. The most common application has 
been in designing tests in traditional "ability-based" do- 
mains (e.g., achievement, intelligence, aptitude). IRT ap- 
proaches have also been used in developing tests that do 
not involve making “right versus wrong” item responses, 
such as personality tests (Waller &amp; Reise, 1989), interest 
inventories, and tests designed to help make classification 
decisions. Embretson (1996) argues that every psychologist 
should be familiar with IRT since it is the foundation of the 
"new rules of measurement.” A variety of sources (e.g., 
Drasgow &amp; Hulin, 1990; Hambleton, Swaminathan, &amp; 
Rogers, 1991; Hulin, Drasgow, &amp; Parsons, 1983) ean be 
consulted for a more thorough discussion of IRT techniques 
in general. In this section the focus will be on application of 
IRT to the MBTI. Also see Harvey and Thomas (1996) for a 
similar discussion as well as for a comparison of IRT, which 
is based on modern test theory, with classical test theory 
(CTT) methods of scoring and determining the reliability of 
the MBTI. In CTT the unit of analysis is the test or scale as a 
whole; in IRT it is the individual item (Drasgow &amp; Hulin, 
1990). 

Construction and evaluation of tests based on IRT, there- 
fore, focus on the relationship between a persons “true 
score" on the psychological characteristic Cor dimension) in 
question and the likelihood of making a particular response 
to an individual test item. For example, how likely is it that 
a person with a "true" preference for Extraversion will 
choose the Extraverted response to an item on the E-1 
scale? 

While many different IRT models have been proposed, a 
highly desirable aspect of current IRT models, as opposed 
to CTT models, is that they allow for both linear and nonlin- 
car relations to exist between the underlying psychological 
characteristie and the observed item response. This is 


important for the MBTI because, as will be demonstrated, a 
nonlinear relationship is both theoretically desirable and 
empirically accurate. The relationship between the response 
and the construct can be graphically described using an item 
characteristic curve (ICC). The horizontal axis of an ICC for 
a particular item shows the varying levels of the psychologi- 
cal characteristic the item is designed to measurc. The verti- 
cal axis (phr) shows the probability that a person at a given 
level would respond to the item in the keyed direction. 

The scores are called theta in IRT terminology and are 
denoted as 0. Theta corresponds roughly to a nonlinear 
rescaling of the "true score" of classical test theory (Dras- 
gow &amp; Hulin, 1990). Figure 7.1 shows two hypothetical 
ICCs. In both cases scores on the far left of the scale repre- 
sent people with very clear preferences for Extraversion, 
and scores on the far right of the scale represent people with 
very clear preferences for Introversion. The right half of the 
scale, Introversion in the case of the MBTI E-I scale, is 
called the “keyed” direction. While choice of which pole of 
the dichotomy is defined as the keyed direction is entirely 
arbitrary for the purposes of IRT, for the sake of consistency 
with previous MBTI conventions I, N, E and P are defined 
as the keyed direction. So as 6 increases from left to right, 
we would expect higher levels of endorsement of the item 
in the predicted, or keyed, direction, which is the Intro- 
verted direction. In other words, we would expect that peo- 
ple with a elear preference for Introversion would have a 
much greater chance of giving the Introverted response to 
an E-l item than would people with a clear preference for 
Extraversion. 

The IRT models that are designed for dichotomously 
scored items, such as those used on the MBTI, describe 
each items characteristics or performance using up to three 
parameters. These parameters define the way in which a 
persons placement on 8 is related to the observed likeli- 
hood of endorsing the item in a given direction (e.g.. a “cor- 
rect” response in the case ol a right-wrong test item, or a 
response in the kcyed direction in the case of a personality or 
interest inventory item). 

The a parameter describes an item's degree of discrimi- 
nation. Higher discrimination parameters are associated 
with items that produce more information regarding a per- 
sons standing on the characteristic of interest (denoted by 
0). In Figure 7.1, the item producing the dashed item char- 
acteristic curve has a much higher a parameter than the item 
producing the solid line. The steeper the curve at the partie- 
ular 0 that is most relevant to the purposes of the measure- 
ment, the more information is produced and the greater the 
likelihood of the person responding in the keyed direction 
to the item. The 0 that is most relevant for an MBTI item is 
described in the next section. For a perfectly flat line, a 
would equal 0, which would indicate no information; for 
such an item, no matter what 6 you examined, the likeli- 
hood of responding in the keyed direction would be the 
same. 


135 


Consiruction and Properties of the MBTI 


PKR 


1.0 GE ME Mi NENE aN MN TEXPrrrrrrlil 


0.8 


0.6 


0.4 


0.2 


&amp; 
g 
z 
B 
g 
£ 
&amp; 
E 
e 





00- mm mS OG Oe Se mmm m n m UE Gm S m n un © 


-3.0 TAS E20 - x 


Extraversion 


ID —Ü5 0.0 0.5 1.0 125 20 2:5 3.0 
Theta Introversion 


ITEM ms | mmm 2 


Figure 7.1 ltem Characteristic Curves for Two Hypothetical Items 


The b, or difficulty, parameter in IRT quantifies the left- 
right location of the ICC on the 0 scale; items that are more 
"difficult" will have their ICCs shifted toward the right por- 
tion of the horizontal scale, whereas “easier” items will be 
shifted toward the left. When applied to either right-wrong 
or inventory-type tests, the main function of the difficulty 
parameter is in telling us the area on the 0 scale at which à 
given test item produces the maximum amount of informa- 
tion regarding the persons score on the psychological char- 
acteristic in question: "Hard" items provide the most infor- 
mation for people who score toward the right end of the 0 
scale, whereas “easy” items provide maximum information 
for those who score toward the left end of the 0 scale. To 
place this in MBTI terms, consider an E-1 item, where the 
keyed direction is (arbitrarily) determined to be Introver- 
sion. The curve of an E-I item with a high b parameter 
would have its steepest slope not above 0.0, but above a 0 
that is toward the keyed or Introverted end of the scale. For 
example, imagine moving the dashed line in Figure 7.1 to 
the right so that the almost vertical portion of the line 
would be over the 0 at 2.0. This would be an item that pro- 
vided information about people who are, for example, clear 
Introverts versus those who are very clear Introverts. Such 
an item would provide little information about Introverts 
versus Extraverts because the probability of responding in 
the keyed direction would be the same for all Extraverts 
and for Introverts whose 8 is less than 2.0. 


Finally, the c, or lower asymptote, parameter defines the 
baseline for item-endorsement rates that would be expected 
from individuals who score very far to the left (low) end of 
the 0 scale. In traditional right-wrong tests, a nonzero lower 
asymptote for the ICC is often attributable to low-ability 
individuals guessing thc correct answer. In tests that do not 
use right-wrong items, the need for a nonzero lower asymp- 
tote can also occur due to such factors as the social desirabil- 
ity (or lack thereof) of a given item response. In MBTI terms 
an item with a high c parameter would mean that even peo- 
ple who are very clear Extraverts have some probability of 
responding to thc item in the Introverted direction. 

One of the main strengths of using IRT for test develop- 
ment and evaluation is that it tends to provide a much 
more detailed view of item functioning than is possible 
using traditional methods based on CTT. In particular, 
when using the three-parameter IRT model described 
above, items can be selected from a pool to form a test that 
produces the maximum amount of test-level information 
(which corresponds roughly to the concept of rcliability in 
CTT) and discrimination in a prespecified region of the 0 
scale. 





For the MBTI, which employs a cutoff score, items can be 
selected to produce a scale that demonstrates its maximum 
discriminating power at, or near, the cutoff point on the scale. 





136 Research 


Applying IRT to the MBTI 


Although IRT methods were initially developed in the con- 
text of ability tests that employed right-wrong items, they 
are equally applicable to other types of tests (such as per- 
sonality inventories) that do not view item responses in a 
right-wrong fashion, especially those instruments for which 
item responses are dichotomous. As is described in more 
detail by Harvey and Thomas (1996), IRT development and 
scoring can be readily applied to the MBTI given the fact 
that each of the four primary MBTI scales is bipolar in 
nature, with cach individual item being scored dichoto- 
mously. To apply IRT to the MBTI, one of the responses for 
each item is designated as the keved response and is associ- 
ated with 0 scores toward the right of the scale. In this case 
the I, N, E and P poles were designated as the keyed 
response for the E-1, S-N, T-E and J-P scales, respectively. 
Here, the choice of a keyed pole is arbitrary, serving simply 
to define the direction of the 0 scale for each of the MBTI 
dichotomies. 

For example, the hypothetical item denoted by the solid 
line in Figure 7.1 could be seen as being drawn from the E-1 
scale (e.g., *easy versus hard to get to know"); in this case, if 
the I response were designated as the keyed response, all 
individuals who chose the response “hard to get to know” 
would be scored as endorsing the item, and those who chose 
the E response (“easy to get to know”) would be scored as 
not endorsing the item in the keyed direction. Thus for any 
given 0 it is possible to determine the percentage of individ- 
uals having that preference that would be expected to pro- 
duce the I response by examining the location of the ICC 
above the 0 of interest. Thus in the hypothetical solid item 
in Figure 7.1, in the group of people who share a score of 
+1.0 (i.e., relatively clear Introverts), we would expect that 
approximately two-thirds of them (64926) would endorse this 
hypothetical item in the keyed (D) direction, with the rc- 
mainder selecting the E-keyed response. 

In IRT the 6 scale is arbitrary in nature; by convention it 
is typically expressed as a traditional z score (with 0 defin- 
ing the midpoint, scores below the midpoint being nega- 
tive, and those above the midpoint being positive). In the 
context of the MBTI, by selecting the I, N, E and P poles as 
the keyed responses, 0 scores are analogous to continuous 
scores on cach of the four MBTI scales, with positive 0 
scores defining individuals whose types are 1, N, E, and P. 
and negative 9 scores defining individuals whose type lies 
in the E, S, T, and J direction. (It should be noted, however, 
that 0 scores are not reported to respondents and thus the 
unwanted connotations resulting from associating a nega- 
live number with a preference are avoided.) Categorical 
MBTI types can therefore be simply assigned by di- 
chotomizing the @ scores; although as a practical matter 
the 0 score cutoff that corresponds to the natural dividing 
point between types docs not necessarily have to fall pre- 
cisely at 0 = 0.0, it docs lie in the middle region of the 0 


scale for each of the four MBTI dimensions. (See the sec- 
tion below about how the midpoint of the scales was in fact 
adjusted.) 

To summarize, although the mechanics of IRT scoring 
differ quite a bit from the much simpler methods used in 
CTT, itis a very straightforward matter to apply IRT meth- 
ods to score the MBTI: Namely, the IRT 6 scores correspond 
directly to the continuous scores that were previously cal- 
culated based on the prediction ratio scoring method. 
These scores can be dichotomized to produce categorical 
type values in precisely the same way that the earlier PR- 
based preferences were dichotomized to assign types. 

It is also interesting to note that although the PR and IRT 
methods are derived from different kinds of measurement 
theories, they tend to agree to a large extent on what consti- 
tutes a “good” MBTI item. Gencrally items whose responses 
were weighted 2,2 or 1,2 based on the PR method also tend 
to have high discriminatory power, or information (i.c., 
they have high values of the a parameter, or steep slopes) 
and also tend to have b parameters close to the midpoint of 
the scale. It is with the other items, those whose responses 
were not weighted as highly using the PR method, that the 
iwo methods tend to disagree the most. A number of these 
lowcr-weighted items therefore were not selected for inclu- 
sion in the revised Indicator. However, cven for items where 
the agreement is high between the two methods, IRT will 
generally yield more precise scores. 


Model Selection and Fit 


Although there are different IRT models available, includ- 
ing one-, two-, and three-parameter models, the three- 
parameter logistic [RT model was used to select items for 
the revised MBTI and in the new MBTI scoring system. 
Each parameter in this model provides useful information 
about MBTI items. Specifically, the reasons for choosing the 
three-parameter model are as follows. 

First, past research that used IRT methods to examine 
the MBTI (e.g., Harvey &amp; Murry, 1994; Harvey, Murry, &amp; 
Markham, 1994; Harvey &amp; Thomas, 1996) has shown quite 
clearly that the MBTI items do indeed differ with respect to 
their relationship with the underlying preferences. Some 
items simply carry more information, or discriminating 
power, than do other items. In practical terms this is 
indexed by the slope of the ICC for each item. (It was also 
observed in the PR method by the differential weights asso- 
ciated with the items.) The a parameter provides an index 
of the information provided by each item. 

Second, the b parameter defines the location on the 0 
scale at which the item provides its maximum information, 
or discrimination, The above research studies also demon- 
strated that there is considerable variability across MBTI 
items with respect to the areas of the preference scale at 
which they are most informative. For any given MBTI scale 
it is desirable to have the maximum amount of information 


Construction and Properties ofthe MBTI 137 





occur at the midpoint of the scale. To the extent that this 
occurs, and to the extent that the midpoint corresponds to 
the true dichotomy, then the item will be separating people 
correctly into the two preference categories. 

Finally, with respect to the c parameter, although past 
IRT research on the MBTI has suggested that most MBTI 
items do not require a sizable nonzero lower asymptote, a 
few items do produce ICCs whose lower values do not 
approximate 0. To accommodate these items a c parameter 
is needed. This parameter is useful in accounting for social 
desirability or any other factor that would lead people of 
one preference to have a nonzero likelihood of choosing the 
response associated with the opposite preference. 


Assumptions Underlying the Model 


All scoring systems make assumptions, and IRT is not 
exempt in this regard. As always, it is important to deter- 
mine, to the extent possible, the degree to which these 
assumptions are plausible, or consistent with the actual 
MBTI item responses they are meant to describe and sum- 
marize. In the case of IRT scoring, some of the most impor- 
tant assumptions relate to the choice of which IRT model to 
use. Many of the questions related to model choice were 
already introduced above: Namely, do the items exhibit dif- 
ferential discrimination (the a parameter), does this discrim- 
ination occur at different points along the preference scale 
(the b parameter), and are there at least some items with 
appreciably nonzero lower asymptotes (the ¢ parameter)? 
Research has demonstrated that all of these questions are 
answered in the affirmative. This research (e.g., Harvey, 
Murry, &amp; Markham, 1994), which involved fitting the threc- 
parameter model to MBTI item responses, showed quite 
clearly that considerable variability was present with respect 
to the estimates of the a, b, and c parameters. The assump- 
tion of a three-parameter model is therefore justified. 
Another assumption of IRT is that the set of items on a 
scale is *unidimensional." That is, the item pools for a given 
scale should be dominated by a single underlying factor. 
Research that examined the dimensionality of the Form F 
item pools (e.g., Harvey, Murry, &amp; Stamoulis, 1995) demon- 
strated that this is indeed the case and that these underlying 
factors are precisely the ones hypothesized by the MBTI— 
namely the four preference scales. Subsequent factor ana- 
lytic studies using the updated Form M item pools have fur- 
ther established the generality of these earlier findings. This 
is not to say that each of the four MBTI dimensions cannot 
be broken down into subcategories. Indeed, the factor analy- 
sis of the MBTI Research Form, from which the Form M 
items were selected, demonstrated the existence of 19 sub- 
factors, each of which was related as expected to one of the 
four preference scales. The existence of such a hierarchical 
relationship between scales and subscales does not violate 
the IRT assumption of unidimensionality; MBTI scales are 
both unidimensional and multifaceted as these are defined 


in IRT. This is seen quite clearly in the MBTI Step II and 
Step III scoring systems. 

Another assumption on which IRT is based is that the 
underlying relationship between the psychological charac- 
teristic being measured and the observahle responses to the 
items chosen to measure that characteristic is nonlinear. 
One of the most compelling arguments in favor of the appro- 
priateness—indeed, the necessity—of the three-parameter 
IRT view of the MBTI can be found in the results obtained 
using empirical ICCs. In this approach an ICC is computed 
for each item, plotting the observed. percentage. of item 
endorsements in the keyed direction (vertical axis) against 
the total number of items endorsed in the keved direction. 
Figure 7.2 presents an empirically derived ICC for a strongly 
discriminating MBTI item; Figure 7.3 presents the empirical 
ICC for an item with more modest discrimination and a 
clearly defined nonzero lower asymptote. Because these are 
empirical ICCs, the horizontal axis represents actual Form 
G preference scores rather than 0 scores. 

The results presented in Figure 7.2 make a strong case 
for the need to use a nonlincar model of the relationship 
between the underlying preference and the observed likeli- 
hood of endorsing an item in the keyed direction. There is a 
very strong s-shaped relationship, with this item providing 
a large amount of information in the intermediate range of 
the preference scale and less information (i.e., flatter slope) 
toward either end of the scale. 

The most extreme case of a nonlinear function for an 
MBTI-like item would be an ICC that assumed the shape of 
a perfect step function centered exactly over the midpoint 
ol the scale; this would be a case of maximum information 
and maximum separation between people of opposite pref- 
erences on the scale. The dashed line in Figure 7.1 comes 
very close to representing such an “ideal” item. For an E-l 
item with such an ICC, all of the Introverts would choose 
the Introverted response and none of the Extraverts would, 
and vice versa. While some items come close to this limit, it 
is neither required nor expected that all items assume this 
form, for two reasons: 

First, neither Jung nor Myers believed that everyone was 
a "type." The fact that even the best of the MBTI items do 
not conform to the ideal demonstrates the theoretical 
proposition that for various reasons, including develop- 
mental or situational factors, a given person at a given time 
will have some chance of responding to an item in a direc- 
tion opposite that of his or her preference. 

The second reason why the perfect step function would 
not be expected is that responses are not equally popular for 
all types holding that preference, a fact that has been demon- 
strated in many item analyses conducted over the years. For 
example, not all Sensing types are equally likely to respond in 
the Sensing direction to a given Sensing question. For these 
reasons, desirable items for MBTI scales would be those that 
showed the general s-shape or pattern but that varied some- 
what from the pure step function. 


138 Research 


PKR 
1.0 od TE O 


0.8 


0.6 "dn 





0.4 


Im FA 
a 
0.0 ooopooopooono np o een p 


60 50 40 30 20 lO 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 


Extraversion Introversion 


E-I Preference Scores 


Figure 7.2 Empirical Item Characteristic Curve for an E-I Item with High Discrimination 


PKR 
1.0 o ] 0o00 


0.8 : o 


0.6 


0.4 


0.2 





0.0 


60 50 40 30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Extraversion Introversion 


E-I Preference Scores 


Figure 7.5 Empirical Item Characteristic Curve for an E-I Item with Low Discrimination 


Figure 7.2 also shows the very high degree of “fit” of the 
IRT model to the observed MBTI item responses. The 
squares in this figure represent the actual average rates of 
item endorsement for respondents grouped according to 
the number of items endorsed on the scale in the keyed 
direction (i.e., the square on the farthest right of the figure 
represents the average of those people who gave the I 
response to all of the E-I items). The very close correspon- 
dence of these values to the overall ICC drawn through 
these points shows that the IRT model is capable of provid- 
ing a very good description of “real-world” data. 

In summary, the assumptions of IRT are consistent with 
its use with the MBTI. Having provided a basic introduction 
to IRT, we turn now to how IRT was used to (1) select items 
for Form M and (2) score those items. 


Selection of Items for Form M 


The 1998 revision of the MBTI offered the opportunity to 
investigate the possibilities of revising, adding, or deleting 
items from the instrument. To investigate these possibili- 
ties, a systematic process was employed to test and select 
items that would compose a new form of the Indicator: 
Form M. The five major steps in the item selection process 
were as follows: 


B Step I: Create an initial item pool 

W Step 2: Develop item selection criteria 

B Step 3: Construct a research form 

B Step 4: Administer the research form to a national sample 
WB Step 5: Select the final items for the revised MBTI 


Step |: Create an Initial Item Pool 


An initial pool of potential items was created from a number 
of sources. One set of items consisted of all 290 questions 
contained on Form J of the MBTI. These items comprise all 
of the items that had survived the years of research and item 
analysis conducted by Isabel Briggs Myers. Myers had never 
intended all of these items to be used on the four dichoto- 
mous preference scales. Some of the items were created lor 
the purpose of additional scoring methods intended to pro- 
vide subscale scores—and indeed some of these items are 
used in the Step If and Step IH scoring systems. Although not 
all of the Form J items were designed to measure type, all 
were included in creating an initial item pool to determine 
whether they could function as measures ol type as well as 
fulfill their original function of providing suhscale scores. 

A second set of items, coincidentally also numbering 
290, was added to the initial pool for testing. About 90 of 
these items were written by two experienced MBII users, 
one a clinician and the other a researcher. The other 200 
items were created by Thomas (1996b). In most cases these 
items represented slight revisions ol existing MBTI Form J 





Construction and Properties of the MBTI 139 


-— —Q' m PEE 








Table 7.2 


Theoretical Criteria 


Item Selection Criteria 


Theoretically meaningful content 
Richness of the item pool 
Forced-choice format 

Phrase questions and word pairs 


Wording for comparable attractiveness 
Empirical Criteria 


Satisfactory prediction ratios for each response 
Satisfactory information at the midpoint of the scale 
No significant age or gender differences 


Low item-to-scale correlations with nonkeyed scales 


items. Revisions included using more up-to-date language 
in phrase questions or different pairings of words from 
existing word pairs, or pairing an existing word with a new 
word. The testing of these new and revised items was 
undertaken for four reasons: 


l. To determine if there were other items that could 

improve the overall psychometric properties of the 

MBTI 

To find new T-F items that did not show gender dif- 

ferences 

3. To find new T-F items that might help inerease the 
reliability of this scale 

+. To determine the effeet of rephrasing certain MBTI 
items 


i 


When writing new items or revising Form J items, the 
basic procedures outlined by Myers were followed. Some 
effort was also made to fill potential gaps in the content of a 
preference domain, although construet coverage was not 
the primary criterion for an experimental item. Following 
Myers, item content was deemed to be less important than 
the ability of the words and form of the sentence to serve as 
a "stimulus to evoke a type response." 

The 290 Form J items combined with the 290 experimen- 
tal items brought the initial item pool to 580 potential items. 


Step 2: Develop Item Selection Criteria 


To select the best items from the initial pool of 580 items, a 
set of criteria was developed by a panel of experts familiar 
with the history of the instrument and the MBTI research lit- 
erature. These criteria are listed in Table 7.2. The MBTI 
Research Advisory Board also played a role in developing and 
rehining the criteria and applying them to the item pool. 
These criteria were not all developed, nor were they applied, 
on just one occasion. They evolved through many discus- 
sions and many experimental versions of the final revised 


140 Research 


form. Some of the criteria were applied to the initial item 
pool as a means of narrowing this pool to a more manageable 
size. Other criteria then became more important as a means 
ol selecting the final set of items. 

As seen in Tabie 7.2, the item selection criteria can be 
grouped into two broad categories: theoretical criteria and 
empirical criteria. 


Theoretical Criteria Theorctical criteria were primarily 
concemed with ensuring that item content and format were 
consistent with Jungs and Myers’ theories of psychological 
type in general and specifically with the theory of opposites 
that underlie type dichotomies. The general guidelines that 
were followed through all the revisions of the instrument, 
including Form M, were to write or revise items that ac- 
complished the following: 


MW Allowed people to self-report their preferences accurately 

B Reflected the preferences described by Jung for Extraver- 
sion or Introversion (E-I), Sensing or Intuition (S-N), 
and Thinking or Feeling judgment (T-F) 

B Reflected the preference for Judging or Perceiving (J-P), 
which was created by Isabel Myers to measure the effects 
of the judging and perceiving attitudes in their Extraverted 
appearance, so that this information could be used to 
determine a dominant function 

M Reflected the assumption that each pole of the dichotomy 
is equally valuable 


Theoretically Meaningful Content Before beginning to de- 
velop the MBTI, Isabel Myers and Katharine Briggs had thor- 
oughly studied Jungs Psychological Types for descriptions of 
and subtle clues about type preferences and their interac- 
tions. They had been carefully observing type for more than 
two decades and drew on Jungian theory and their observa- 
tions to generate questions that could be evaluated. 

One of the first requirements imposed by ihe type 
hypothesis was that justice must be done to quite opposite 
viewpoints. Each dichotomy requires a choice between 
equally legitimate alternatives. Thus type questions have no 
intrinsic good or bad about them and no right or wrong 
except as a certain answer is right for one respondent and 
wrong for another having a different type. The questions 
therefore needed to deal with self-reportable surface con- 
trasts in habits, reactions, and points of view that did not 
imply inferiority. The respondent should never be placed on 
the defensive about his or her response, nor should any 
preference be regarded as superior. 

No question could be very extreme, since accuracy was 
more important near the middle of the distribution than at 
the ends. It is fairly easy to write items that separate peo- 
ple with very clear preferences on each dichotomy, but 
this was little help in separating people at the middle of 
the dichotomy. Similarly, an answer wrongly given by a lot 
of people near the middle was a hindrance. Since all per- 
sons were assigned to one pole or the other on each scale, 


discrimination in the center of the scale, where preferences 
were almost evenly divided, was essential. 

Questions were sought not so much for theoretical 
meaning as for indicating the basic preference that influ- 
ences the respondents choice. They were directed to scem- 
ingly simple surface behaviors in the hope that they would 
provide reliable clues 10 the complex and profound patterns 
of behavior that could not otherwise be reached in a self- 
report instrument. The assumption was that preferences 
themselves are often not consciously formulated, in which 
case direct questions about them would not be answered 
accurately. The strategy was to use observable “straws in the 
wind" to make inferences about the direction of the wind 
itself. Many of the items, therefore, can be considered 
"pointers" that indicate a direction of preference. They are 
not direct measures of the quantity of a trait or of the devel- 
opment or ability of the person who holds that preference. 

Since the content of the question was only a stimulus to 
evoke a type of reaction, some questions seemed to be trivial. 
The advantage was that they could be asked without imperti- 
nence and answered in either direction without strain. As 
an encouragement to candor, this harmlessness was a great 
advantage. Sometimes, however, this seeming simplicity 
backfires when a respondent indignantly decides that noth- 
ing significant can come out of such “worthless scraps of 
information." 

It is important to understand that the content areas of 
the questions were not meant to cover all domains of the 
preference. Unlike with many educational tests, there was 
no attempt to precisely specify the domain and then to sys- 
tematically write items to cover this domain. The intent 
instead was to identify any clues about preference that 
would empirically discriminate the groups of people of each 
preference. The interest in questions was not in the superfi- 
cial behavior reported but in the evidence the questions 
could provide about the underlying preferences. Although 
the primary intent was not coverage of a domain, a range of 
behaviors thought to indicate each preference was included. 
For example, the E-I questions touch on Extraverted and 
Introverted differences in sociability, friendship, and inti- 
macy; detachment or involvement; and outspokenness or 
reserve. This effort is described in greater detail in the fol- 
lowing section. 


Richness of the Item Pools Another theoretical criterion that 
was used to guide item selection was the need to have the 
item pools for each scale reflect the richness of that prefer- 
ence domain. Factor analysis was used in two different ways 
to check for content coverage. Step ll scoring of the MBTI is 
based on a factor analysis of all the items on Form J of the 
MBTI. As this scoring system demonstrates, each of the four 
preference domains can be further subdivided in this way 
into a number of subscales. The Form J items in the pool 
were mapped onto the 20 subscales from the MBTI Step II to 
ensure that at least in the initial pool there were items on 


each of the four preference scales representing each of the 
subscales associated with that preference. This was done 
with the realization, however, that the Step H subscales do 
not in themselves completely define the preference domains. 
While each of the four dichotomies encompasses more than 
is represented by the 5 subscales, the subscales do provide at 
least a minimal criterion by which the richness of the 
domain can be measured. 

A separate factor analysis was conducted of the rescarch 
form (described below). This analysis also produced a set 
of subfactors associated with each of the four preference 
scales. There was a high degree of overlap between the sub- 
scales arrived at in this analysis and those defined by the 
Step II scoring system. The only differences were a result of 
having used two different item pools and two different sam- 
ples in the two analyses. 

At each step in the item selection process, the items 
remaining in the pool were compared to these two sets of 
subscales to ensure that the final scales demonstrated the 
appropriate richness. 


Forced-Choice Format Questions are presented in forced- 
choice format primarily because type theory postulates 
dichotomies. All questions offer choices between the poles 
of the same dichotomy, E or I, Sor N, T or EJ or P There are 
no questions that cut across dichotomies. The forced-choice 
format was required because both poles of a dichotomy are 
valuable and both are used at different times by everyone. lf 
the items used a different format, many people would cor- 
rectly respond to both sides of the dichotomy. The goal of 
the items is to force a series of choices that will determine 
which of two valuable or useful behaviors or attitudes is 
preferred by the individual. The forced-choice format also 
has the advantage of avoiding the bias of acquiescent and 
social desirability response sets. 

A small number of the Form J items in the initial item 
pool had more than two possible responses. These had been 
included in previous forms of the Indicator, including Form 
G, for research purposes to determine which of the re- 
sponses was more valid. These items were changed by elim- 
inating one or more of the available responses, so that only 
two responses remained. The responses that were elimi- 
nated were those with the lowest weight on Form G. When 
this criterion did not lead to a clear choice as to which 
response to eliminate, the response weights from the Step II 
subscales were used. 


Phrase Questions and Word Pairs MBTI items occur in two 
different forced-choice formats: phrase questions and word 
pairs. Originally all questions were phrases followed by a 
choice. For example, the first question of Form M is 

When you go somewhere for the day, would you rather 

.A» plan what you will do and when, or 

B^ just go? 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 141 


Word-pair questions were added for Forms E and E 
Examples from Form M are: 


scheduled A B unplanned 


gentle A B firm 


The instructions for the word pairs are as follows: 


Which of these words appeals to you more? Think what the words 
mean, not how they look or how they sound. 


The second sentence in these instructions was added in 
1977 with Form G because interviews with persons taking 
Form F revealed that some persons had answered some of 
the word pairs on the basis of the sound or the appcarance 
of the words, not their meaning. 


Wording for Comporable Attractiveness Early in the devel- 
opment and testing of questions, the authors discovered 
that a particular question elicited very different meanings 
for different types. In writing items, every effort was made 
to make the responses appeal to the appropriate types—for 
example, to make the Perceiving response to a J-P item as 
attractive to people with a Perceiving preference as the 
Judging response is to those with a Judging preference. The 
result is that responses may be psychologically rather than 
logically opposed, a fact that may annoy a number of 
Thinking types. Item content is less important than that the 
words and form of the sentence should serve as a “stimulus 
to evoke a type response.” Where the attempt to make 
choices equally appealing did not succeed on earlier forms, 
item weighting was adopted (discussed later in detail). 


Empirical Criteria A number of empirical criteria were 
also used at various stages of the item selection process. The 
empirical criteria are primarily concerned with ensuring 
that the items dilferentiate between people of opposite 
preferences on each scale and on that scale alone. Both 
prediction ratios and IRT item parameters were used to 
select items. 


Satisfactory Prediction Ratios for Each Response A predic- 
tion ratio was calculated for each of the responses for the 


290 items from Form J and for the 90 items written by the 
two type experts. 

The same cutoff that had been used to select items for 
Form G was used in the revision process to eliminate items 
from the initial item pool. Only items with a prediction 
ratio greater than .62 for at least one ol the responses were 
retained for further analysis. 


Satisfactory Information at the Midpoint of the Scale For 
each item in the initial item pool the amount of information 


at the midpoint of the scale was calculated using IRT param- 
eters. For MBTI items, information at the midpoint indi- 
cates how well responses to the item separate people into 
the opposite sides of each dichotomy. Information at the 


142 Research 


midpoint is the slope of the item characteristic curve at 0 = 0 
on each scale. No absolute cutoff was used in examining 
these statistics. The top-performing items on each scale were 
selected for further testing. See Figure 7.1 for examples of 
two items with different degrees of information. 


No Significant Gender or Age Differences Form G, like 
most of the previous forms of the Indictor, uses separate 
weights for males and females for the T—F scale. The oppor- 
tunity existed with the 1998 revision to determine whether 
advanced methodological techniques could be used to select 
items that would not require separate weighting. Since these 
techniques can be used to examine item response differences 
among any grouping of subjects and since the MBTI is 
administered across a very broad range of ages, three differ- 
ent age groups were examined. The number of minority 
group members was far too small to justify subgroup analy- 
ses for race-based subgroups in the Form M standardization 
sample. These analyses will be conducted as Form M data 
on minority samples accumulate. 

The analytic technique used to determine whether sig- 
nificant subgroup differences existed in the response to 
MBTI items was differential item functioning (DIF). The 
general idea underlying DIF analyses as applied to the 
MBTI is that people from one subgroup (e.g., males) who 
have the same overall clarity of preference on a given scale 
should have essentially the same observed likelihood of 
endorsing a given item in the keyed direction as individuals 
who belong to another demographic subgroup (e.g., fe- 
males). Likewise, at the scale level, the goal would be to 
have little or no cumulative DIF when the items in each of 
the four MBTI scales are aggregated. Therefore two basic 
questions were addressed in the DIF analyses: (1) To what 
degree does each item perform similarly across demo- 
graphic subgroups of MBTI respondents? and (2) To what 
degree do subgroup differences in responding become evi- 
dent at the total numbcr of items endorsed level? 

A DIF analysis was therefore conducted to identify all 
items in the initial item pool that showed significant gender 
or age differences. Each item that showed age or gender DIE 
was examined for content and a decision was made as to 
whether to retain or drop the item. Farlier rescarch on the 
items from Forms F and G of the MBTI (Gratias &amp; Harvey, 
1998; Harvey, 1997) had shown that DIF is not a serious 
problem in the MBTI. That is, although some DIF is seen for 
some individual items, the sizes of the differences are not 
especially large, and of greater importance, there is only a 
very small degree of cumulative DIF at the scale level. The 
cumulative DIF is most important because the classification 
decision (c.g., is this person more likely to have a preference 
for E or for 1?) is made at the scale level. Given that the ini- 
tial item pool contained new and revised items, new DIF 
analyses were conducted on the entire pool. 

Two approaches were used to quantify DIE One approach 
used the Mantel-aenszel (M-H A) technique, popularized 


by Educational Testing Service, which calculates the degree 
of dilference in observed item-endorsement rates for sub- 
groups of respondents formed by breaking the score esti- 
mates into a number of intervals. A major advantage of this 
method is the existence of widely used rules-of-thumb for 
gauging the amount and severity of the observed item-level 
DIE À second approach used IRT-based methods that com- 
pare the ICCs estimated separately in each subgroup in order 
to provide a measure of overall DIF at the scale level. In this 
approach, test-characteristic curves for the demographic 
subgroups are compared in order to assess the cumulative 
impact of the DIF on the expected total number of items that 
would be endorsed in a given direction. 

Five items were eliminated from the item pool at this 
point for gender DIF. For example, the following item from 
the E-I scale was eliminated because the responses for men 
and women were significantly different: 


Do you usually 
(A^ show your feelings freely, or 
B keep your feelings to yourself? 


In predicting the likelihood of giving the (B) response to 
this item, it was more useful to know the respondents gen- 
der (males tended to endorse (B) more than did females) 
than it was to know the persons E-1 preference. Those with 
a preference for Introversion also were more likely to 
respond with (B) than were those preferring Extraversion, 
but the gender difference was more predictive. Since this 
item functioned differentially for men and women, it was 
dropped. 

Given that Form G uses separate weights for males and 
females on the T-F scale, it was interesting to discover how 
few items there were in the pool, from any scale, that exhib- 
ited significant DIF. As the example above illustrates, not all 
of these items were from the T—F scale, either. 

For the age group analyses, three age groups were used: 
under 35, 35 to 50, and over 50. While it would have been 
desirable to analyze other age groupings as well as or 
instead of the above, DIF analysis requires large numbers of 
respondents in each group. The distribution of ages in the 
sample did not permit other breakdowns. 

Items that showed significant DIF by age were examined 
carefully for content. Some of these items were eliminated 
because they contained language that high school or college 
students might have found unfamiliar. Others were retained, 
however, because in the opinion of the type experts the 
items might have been tapping some developmental aspects 
of the preferences. For example, the following Form G 
word pair was dropped: 


party „À B° theater 


It is likely that the response to this item (overwhelmingly 
in favor of “party” among the younger group) was due to 
cultural changes affecting theater attendance rather than to 
development issues. Four such items were dropped. 





Low Item-to-Scale Correlations with Nonkeyed Scales As was 
done with all previous forms of the Indicator, item-to-scale 
correlations were calculated for each item to each scale. 
lems were analyzed on all scales, not only the scale in- 
tended. The goal was to select items that made a contri- 
bution to only one scale. In some cases, items with high 
correlations on more than one scale were eliminated. There 
were, however, a number ol items in the item pool in differ- 
ent stages that had high prediction ratios, high information 
at the midpoint, high correlations with the intended scale, 
and moderate correlations with a nonintended scale. These 
were primarily items on the S-N and J-P scales that corre- 
lated with the other scale as well as with the intended scale. 
Since these items met other criteria, both theoretical and 
empirical, a number of them were retained. 


Step 3: Construct a Research Form 


Applying the item selection criteria to the initial item pool 
ol 580 items reduced to 264 the number of items for further 
analysis. A number of different samples were used for the 
item analyses including college students, adults attending 
MBTI qualifying workshops, and employed adults in vari- 
ous organizations throughout the United States. 

To further reduce the pool, the 264 remaining items were 
printed on a research form along with two pages of demo- 
graphic questions that included the following categories: 


B "Census data” such as age, education, ethnic group, and 
income 

Work status 

Satisfaction with work 

Kinds of work performed 
Leisure activities 

Relationship status 
Satisfaction with relationships 
Number ol children 

Birth order 

Spirituality 

Health, stress, and coping 
Hours of television watched 


Completing the research form were 54 items that make 
up the Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation— 
Behavior (FIRO-B) instrument. The FIRO-B items were 
added to provide a source of validity for the MBTI scales 
and to provide normative and standardization data for the 
FIRO-B. 


Step 4: Administer the Research Form 
to a National Sample 


Io provide a new standardization sample for the MBTI 
item weights, the MBTI Research Form was administered 
to a sample of adults, 18 years and older, from across the 
United States. The sampling procedure utilized stratified, 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 143 


single-stage, random-digit dialing ol U.S. households with 
telephones. The targets (i.e., stratification criteria) included 
percentages of people of age, gender, and ethnic group nec- 
essary to match the 1990 U.S. census. A minimum of three 
attempts was made to contact a respondent at each phone 
number. To ensure representativeness, the calls were made 
on weekends and evenings as well as during general busi- 
ness hours on weekdays. When a person answered the 
phone, trained survey stalf briefly described the research 
study and the respondent was asked to state the ages of the 
people in the household. If anyone in the household could 
supply data from a targeted demographic group, the partici- 
pation of that person was then sought. A payment of one 
dollar was offered as an incentive to participate in the study. 

The survey was conducted over about a two-month 
period, during which time 16,000 households were screened. 
Approximately 8,000 households were selected to match the 
targets, and of these, 4,000 people agreed to participate in 
the study and were mailed copies of the MBTI Research 
Form along with a self-addressed, stamped envelope. The 
return rate for mailed lorms was about 8096, yielding a sam- 
ple of approximately 3,200 respondents. 


Step 5: Select the Final Items 
for the Revised MBTI 


An initial factor analysis was conducted on the 264 items 
making up the Research Form to confirm that the items 
were loading on the scales as expected. As with almost all 
other factor analyses of MBTI items, the four MBTI scales 
emerged as the primary factors. Based on this analysis, 26 
items were eliminated because they either did not load on 
any of the four scales or loaded on a scale different from the 
one for which they had been keyed based on theory. The 
dropped items were primarily those that had been keyed to 
either the S—N or the J-P scales but loaded about equally on 
both, or loaded slighily higher on the nonkeyed scale. 

Two panels of experts, the MBTI Research Advisory 
Board and another panel of type experts, reviewed the 
remaining 238 items against the theoretical and empirical 
criteria described above and shown in Table 7.2. As a result 
ol this process, 95 items were chosen to make up the 1998 
MBTI Form M. Ihe characteristics of the final form are 
shown in a later section of this chapter. First, however, is a 
discussion ol the development of the scoring procedure. 


Development of Scoring 
Procedures for Form M 


The 1998 revision also offered the opportunity to test alterna- 
tive scoring techniques for the MBTI. Two primary methods 
were chosen for comparison: the prediction ratio method 
(PR) and a three-parameter item response theory (IRI) 


144 Research 


model. The PR method was examined because this is the 
method used to score every form of the MBTI since Form C. 
A scoring method based on IRT was examined because 
research had suggested that it might provide better preci- 
sion around the midpoint of the scales. At least a half-dozen 
variations of each of these two primary methods were 
tested. To determine which of these two approaches offered 
the best method of scoring the MBT] for type, a large-scale 
best-fit type study was conducted. 


Best-Fit Type Study 


This study involved a comparison of various methods of 
scoring sets of MBTI items, using “verified,” or “best-fit,” 
type as the criterion. To conduct this study a number of 
large-scale users of the MBTI were contacted and offered 
free MBTI forms and feedback reports in exchange for their 
participation. Over two dozen qualified MBTI users agreed 
to participate. 

Six steps were followed in conducting the true type 
study: 


I. Obtain responses to all 290 Form ] items on the MBTI 

research form from all samples. 

Conduct an interpretation session with each sample, 

defining and explaining the MBTI preference scales. 

3. Have each person in the group complete a best-fit 
questionnaire (BFQ) designed to obtain that person's 
belief about his or her best-fit type. 

+. Select items based on criteria unique to the method; 
i.e., use PR and IRT parameters to select a set of items 
to be scored to determine type. 

5. Score the responses to each set ol items using the cor- 
responding PR or IRT scoring methods to arrive at a 
four-letter type. 

6. Compare the type foreach person derived from each 
scoring method to the best-fit type for that person. 


i» 


Best-fit type was obtained from a best-fit questionnaire 
that asked the person to identify the preferences on each of 
the four dichotomous MBTI scales that seemed the best fit 
with his or her self-understanding. For each of the four 
preferences, each person also was asked to rate his or her 
degree of confidence in the estimate of best-fit preference 
on à 5-point scale ranging from “not at all confident” to 
"very confident." The best-fit type estimates and confidence 
ratings were made by each individual after receiving feed- 
back from a qualified interpreter. There was, however, some 
variation in how the BFQs were administered. Some inter- 
preters asked for the questionnaires to be completed and 
returned before providing the MBTI results to the person; 
others returned the MBTI results first and then adminis- 
tered the BFQ. 

Over 4,000 Form J answer sheets were distributed, and 
approximately 2,600 best-fit type questionnaires were re- 
turned. After removing cases with missing data, the final 


sample consisted of N = 2,116 people for whom scored 
MBTI types could be compared to best-fit types. Approxi- 
mately 56% ol the sample was female, and the mean age 
ol the sample was 35 years (SD = 13.6). Of those who 
answered the question asking them to identify the ethnic 
group with which they identified, 87% indicated White, 8% 
Black, 3% Hispanic, 1.3% Asian, and 1% Native American. 

Two different researchers, one an expert in the PR 
method and the other in IRT, were given the response data 
from each Form J for which a BFQ was available along with 
the gender of the respondent. The researchers were given 
no other information about the respondents. The MBTI 
types resulting from the standard Form G scoring proce- 
dures, the best-fit types, the besi-fit confidence ratings, and 
all other demographic information were withheld so that 
the predictions would be independent of any of these data. 
The researchers each used their own chosen method to 
select items, to score the responses, and to assign a four- 
letter “predicted type” to each person in the sample. 

As stated, each of the two basic scoring approaches used 
a somewhat different set of items to arrive at the person’s 


type. This was necessary because both PR and IRT methods 


. arc used not only to score but also to select and to weight _ 


items to arrive at a preference designation on each scale. 
Althongh not common, there wee sume Gone tier Sd 
a high prediction ratio for at least one of the responses but 
provided little information when used in an IRT approach. 
Because the purpose of this study was to determine which 
method provided the highest accuracy in predicting best-fit 
type, each researcher had to be free to choose items that 
maximized the prediction. It was not useful, therefore, to 
compare the two methods for the same set of items, since 
one set would not be optimized for the other approach to 
scoring. 

Using each method, a type was computed for each person 
in the sample. These data were then sent to a third, indepen- 
dent researcher who compared the two different predicted 
types with the best-fit type for each person and computed 
“hit rates.” The hit rates are expressed as a percentage of 
people for whom there is exact agreement between the best- 
fit type (or preference, when working at the level of individ- 
ual scales) and the type (or preference) predicted for that 
person by one of the scoring methods. For example, if one of 
the scoring methods predicted that a persons type was 
ENFP and the person had concluded, after hearing the 
MBTI interpretation, that her best-fit type was in fact ESTP, 
then this prediction was counted as a “miss” when whole 
types were being compared. However, when separate com- 
parisons were made of the individual preference scales, these 
results would yield hits for the E-I and J-P scales and misses 
for the S-N and T-F scales. Hit rates were computed for the 
entire sample and for different demographic categories (age, 
ethnic group, gender) as well as for other breakdowns of the 
sample, such as type of interpretation received (individual 
or group) and type of setting (clinical or organizational). 


Hit rates were also computed by the confidence level of the 
best-fit ratings and by preference score ranges. 

Fight different versions of the PR method and four dif- 
ferent versions of the IRT-based procedure were tested. In 
each casc, regardless of which breakdown of the sample was 
analyzed, one set of predictions from each method was 
clearly superior to the others using that same method. 
Therefore the best prediction from cach method was used 
in the final comparison. 

Alternative versions of the PR method included varia- 
tions in the cutoffs used to select items, in the number of dif- 
ferent weights used, in the scores around the midpoint that 
were used to exclude people from the sample, and in how 
many responses by people of the opposite preference were 
allowed before an item was excluded. The best prediction of 
type using a variation of the PR method used a cutoff of .66, 
had seven categories of weights, excluded people whose 
continuous scores ranged from 90 to 110 on each scale, and 
used a maximum of 40% of the opposite preference who 
could choose a response and still have the response pass as 
an acceptable item. Note that although this variation pro- 
duced the highest best-fit hit rate of all of the PR methods, it 
differs in all respects from the PR method used with Form G. 
The four alternatives based on the IRT procedure included 
varying the cutoffs for IRT item parameters and how the 
midpoint was adjusted for a given set of parameters. 


Results of the Best-Fit Study 


The results of the best-fit study are shown in Table 7.3 for 
the overall sample, for each scale separately, and for males 
and females separately. One column shows the percentage 
of agreement between best-fit type and the type as deter- 
mined by the best of the PR methods. The other column 
shows the percentage of agreement between best-fit type 
and the type as determined by the best of the IRT methods. 
Overall, the best IRT method produced about a 6% higher 
agreement with best-fil type than did the best of the PR 
methods. In all other breakdowns the same pattern was 
observed: IRT produced at least a marginally better percent- 
age of agreement with best-fit type. 

Before concluding this section a number of caveats are in 
order. First, follow-up contacts with most of the inter- 
preters revealed that they had returned the MBTI results to 
the group before asking the participants to complete the 
BFQ. This procedure likely biased the hit rates in favor of 
the PR method, since that ts the method that was used to 
provide the MBTI results received by the participants; it 
may have been difficult for some people to disagree with the 
“official-looking” computer-gencrated results. 

Second, the best overall hit rate is fairly low: 64%. Other 
best-fit studies have yielded a range of 64% to 85%. That 
the overall accuracy in this study is at the low end of this 
range is probably due to the fact that many different profes- 
sionals interpreted the MBTI to a wide variety of groups 
across a variety of settings. Previous best-fit studies have 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 145 





Table 7.3 Comparison of Percentage of 
Agreement with Best-Fit Type for 
PR- and IRT-Based Scoring Methods 
PR IRT 
Overall 58% 64% 
E-I 86.5% 90% 
S-N 86% 88% 
T-F 8576 8676 
J-P 86% 88% 
Males 55% 60% 
Females 60% 67% 


Note: N = 2,116. 


used much more homogeneous groups, the same inter- 
preter, and standard interpretation procedures (within- 
study). More rigorous interpretation standards were sacri- 
ficed in this study because large numbers of people were 
needed to participate so as to yield sufficient numbers of 
people with slight preference scores, thereby permitting a 
meaningful analysis. Another factor influencing the hit rate 
is that the IRT method may not have correctly adjusted the 
midpoint of some of the scales. 


Development of the Form M Self-Scorable 
and Template-Scorable Versions 


As with Form G, a self-scorable version of Form M has been 
created for use in workshops, classes, and groups when it is 
inconvenient or impossible to administer Form M prior to 
the group meeting. A template-scorable version of Form M 
is also available for those who wish to hand-score their 
clients’ answer sheets. The Form M template- and self- 
scorable versions both use the same 93 items to arrive at a 
preference on each of the four scales, as does the standard 
Form M. However, since IRT can be used only on the com- 
puter-scored vetsions for Form M, an alternative scoring 
system was developed for the self-scorable and template- 
based versions. 

The goals of choosing an alternative scoring system for 
the template- and self-scorable versions of Form M were as 
follows: 


B To achieve a high degree of agreement between the 
results of the self-scorable and template-scorable ver- 
sions and those that used IRT computer scoring 

W To use a system that provides quick scoring 10 save 
time in the workshop setting or in hand-scoring by the 
professional 

mw [lo use a scoring method for which hand calculations 
would bc relatively simple so as to reduce the likelihood 
of making errors in scoring 


146 Research 


— 


Table 7.4 Percentage of Agreement 
Between Form M IRT-Scored 
Versions and Form M Template- 
and Self-Scorable Versions 
Percentage of 
Agreement 
Percentage of After Eliminating 
Agreement Respondents with 
Across AI! 0 +.10 Point from 
Preference Respondents Midpoint of Scale 
E 93.8 98.1 
| oa 29:9 
S 99:3 [00.0 
N 97.6 99 
T 97.9 100.0 
E 98.6 100.0 
J 96.8 29. 
p 99/9 99.0 


Note: N 2 4,692. Percentages shown represent the percentage of people 
who show the same preference using both the IRT-scored version and the 
self-scorable version of Form M. 


m To yield results that were easy to interpret and reduced 
the chance of misinterpretation or overinterpretation of 
scores 


A number of different methods were investigated, all 
of which showed high convergence with IRT results. A 
method using unit weighting was adopted since it provided 
the best match with all of the goals. In this method, the per- 
son scoring the instrument simply counts the number of 
answers given for each pole of each dichotomy. The person's 
preferences are determined by calculating. which pole 
received the most responses. See Chapter 5 for the exact 
steps involved in scoring and Chapter 6 for the meaning of 
the results. 

Table 7.4 shows the percentage of agreement between 
scores derived using the standard Form M IRT scoring pro- 
gram and scores derived from the unit-weighted scoring 
method used on the template- and self-scorable versions. 
Agreement for two different samples is shown. The second 
column includes the entire sample of Form M respondents. 
In the third column, the sample has been reduced by 
removing those people whose 0 score was plus or minus .10 
point from the midpoint of each scale. As the table demon- 
strates, the correspondence in both samples is extremely 
high and, as expected, higher in the reduced sample. 


The percentage of agreement between results of the IRT 
scoring system and the unit-weighted scoring system used on 
the self-scorable and template-scorable versions of Form IM 
is very high. 


Scoring the MBTI Using IRT 


One of the most significant differences between the tradi- 
tional PR-based scoring system for MBTI preferences versus 
the methods typically used in IRT scoring concerns the 
means by which item responses are used to estimate each 
persons preferenee score. Unlike the PR method, IRT meth- 
ods use a likelihood-based approach to scoring. 

A fundamental quantity in all of the scoring equations is 
the expected probability that people with a score of 0 will 
endorse item i in the keyed direction (i.e., choosing the I, 
N, E or Panswer), which is a joint function of the IRT scor- 
ing parameters a, b, and c, plus 0 (D isa scaling constant): 


rn eDo (6 - b) 
(9) eG TADS C) EN E 

A maximum likelihood function can be defined based on the 
expected item-endorsement probability as follows (n = 
number of items, u = the 1/0 keyed item response): 


l (u | 0) = n PQ u, 
In} (ul 8) = X [u In P.) + [((1—u)] In (1 —P)] 


To obtain the estimate of each persons 0 score, the above 
function is evaluated across a range of possible 0 values, and 
the 0 value that produces the “most likely” value for the like- 
lihood function (i.e., highest in absolute value) is used as the 
estimate of that persons 8 score. An example of likelihood 
functions for two respondents to the MBTI is shown in Fig- 
ure 7.4. The logic of the IRT scoring procedure is to hypoth- 
esize that the persons score could be any value of 0. The 
likelihood of these hypotheses (i.e., each 0) is then tested 
using two pieces of data: the persons actual repsonses to 
each item and all of the information that is known about the 
characteristics of all of the items. The 0 that has the maxi- 
mum likelihood is then chosen as the best estimate of that 
persons score. If that score is to the right of the midpoint, 
then the persons letter is I, N, E or P. depending on the scale; 
if the 0 score is to the left of the midpoint, then the persons 
letter is E, S, T, or J. Both of the individuals whose likelihood 
functions are shown in Figure 7.4 would be classified as hav- 
ing a preference for Introversion because the maximum 
value (i.e., the highest point) on both functions occurs to 
the right, or Introverted side, of the midpoint. 

Additionally, the height of the likelihood function at its 
maximum point also provides useful information: All other 
things being equal, higher maximum values are more desir- 
able and are associated with item-response profiles that are 
more consistent or plausible. 

Once an estimate of 0 has been established using the 
maximum likelihood method, a Bayesian approach is used 
to refine the estimation. The Bayes expected a posteriori 
(EAP) estimate of 0 is used. 


0- yen Xk L (xx) w (x) 


ye L (xx) w (xx) 





0.0 


Log Likelihood 


-80 


E E-HNEIEHILG —14 =A -1.0 —8 —Q —4 
Extraversion 


OBS wmm: | 


Figure 7.4 Maximum Likelihood Curves for Two Different People 


The advantage of using the Bayes EAP scoring method is 
that the EAP estimate ts effectively a weighted maximum 
likelihood estimate of 0, giving more weight to the areas of 
the assumed @ distribution in which higher numbers of 
individuals are present and less weight to @ values in less 
dense portions of the distribution. 


Tie-Breaking Procedure 


Using IRT scoring. it is very rare lor a persons score on any 
of the four preference scales to land exactly at the 0 that 
defines the midpoint of that scale. Given that the self- and 
iemplate-seorable versions do not use the more precise 
IRT scoring, however, ties may be somewhat more com- 
mon. For all scoring systems, a tie-breaker continues to be 
used with Form M. All ties are broken in the same direc- 
tion as with previous forms of the Indicator: 1, N, F, or P 
When a tie occurs, then the persons preference becomes I, 
N, E or P, depending on the scale, and that persons score 
becomes I. 

The logic behind breaking ties in favor of the N or P 
preferences is that these are the less frequent types in the 
population. If a person is that close to the preference (zero 
difference), there is probably some environmental response 
pressure from the “majority” preference. This pressure can 
result in answers conforming to the majority and contrary 
to true preferences. Thus the persons “true” type is proba- 
bly N or P 


—2 00 02 04 06 08 IHO 12 l4 l6 
Theta 


Construciion and Properties of the MBTI i 


EO 


Introversion 


mum) 


On the E-l scale, recent estimates of the distribution of 
preferences in the population (see Tables 7.14 and 7.15; 
Hammer &amp; Mitchell, 1996) suggest that the proportion of 
Extraverts and Introverts is about equal. However, the 
method of breaking ties in the favor of 1 was retained 
because in many settings there is still cultural pressure to 
behave as an Extravert. 

On the T-F seale the tie-breaker is in the direction of F 
for men because men are more socialized to give I re- 
sponses. For consistency and for continuity with previous 
methods, the same tie-breaker is used for women, that is, in 
the direction of E 

Finally, it is important to understand that the decision 
rules for the tie-breakers should not be overinterpreted. 
The primary purpose of a tie-breaker is to provide a stimu- 
lus for starting a conversation with the respondent about 
why he or she answered the questions about equally in both 
directions. 


Kinds of Results Available from Form M 


Regardless of which version of Form M is used, the goal is 
to arrive at one of the 16 types, and all versions report the 
whole type. For respondents who complete the computer- 
scored versions of Form M, that is, those versions relying 
on IRT scoring, there are four additional kinds of results 
available for each scale: a preference letter, a preference 
clarity index, a preference clarity category, and a continuous 


148 Research 


score. For the self- and template-scorable versions of Form 
M, an additional score is available: the raw points for cach 
pole of cach dichotomy. Table 7.5 summarizes the kinds of 
results available for cach version of Form M. 


Raw Points Raw points are used only on the self- and 
template-scorable versions of Form M. Eight raw points are 
calculated, one for each of the dichotomous preferences (E, 
L S, N, T, E J, P). As described in Chapter 5, these points are 
calculated by simply summing the number of responses for 
each pole of each preference scale. Raw points are only an 
intermediate step used to determine the persons preference 
on a scale and his or her preference clarity category (see 
below); they are not meant to be interpreted. 


Preference Letter As with previous versions of the 
Indicator, the result for each of the four dichotomous scales 
is reported to the client in the form of a letter, which is a 
shorthand for which pole of each dichotomy is preferred. 

As described earlier in this chapter, the IRT-based scoring 
procedure yields a score that, in IRT terminology, is called 0. 
To determine a persons preference on a given scale, the 0 for 
that scale is computed using the IRT three-parameter model. 
If 0 falls to the right of the midpoint of the preference scale, 
the persons preference is determined to be I, N, F or P. 
depending on the scale. If 0 falls to the left of the midpoint, 
the preference is E, S, T or J, depending on the scale. 


Preference Clarity Index The name for the numeral that 
is associated with a preference on Form M is the preference 
clarity index (pci). This index is analogous to thc 
preference score in previous forms of the Indicator. The 
name was changed to preference clarity index for several 
rcasons: 


B The phrase preference clarity better indicates the real 
meaning of the number. 

BW The word index is more appropriate for a type indicator 
since it means "something used or serving to point out; a 
sign, token, or indication [as in] 'a true index of his char- 
acter” and “something that directs attention to some 
fact or condition" (Random House, 1987). 

W Use of the word score had led to misinterpretations of the 
mcaning of the preference score. 

B The word score implies a trait approach that is inappro- 
priate for a type indicator. 


To calculate the preference clarity index the maximum 
and minimum 9 for each scale were determined using the 
national sample data. The persons 0 score on a given prefer- 
ence scale is divided by the maximum 9 for that scale. This 
ratio is multiplied by 30 and then rounded up to the nearest 
positive integer. This puts all of the preference clarity 
indexes on a 1-to-30 scale. 

The preference clarity index is thus a ratio showing how 
consistently the person answered the questions on that scale 
compared with the maximum possible score achievable on 


Table 7.5 Results Available from Form M 


Result Version 





Whole types All versions 


Preference letters All versions 


Preference clarity index IRT computer-scored versions 


(mail-in, Web site, and on-site options) 
Raw points Template- and self-scorable versions 
Preference clarity categories All versions 


Continuous scores (0) IRT computer-scored versions 


(mail-in, Web site, and on-site options) 


that scale (i.e., the score that would result if the person 
answered all of the items on that scale in the keyed direc- 
tion). This ratio takes into account the fact that in IRT scor- 
ing the MBTI items have different weights, reflecting how 
well they discriminate between pcople of opposite prefer- 
ences. The pci also reflects the fact that the IRT scoring pro- 
cedure provides a correction for nonlinearity and for social 
desirability. 

This new index solves one of the problems associated 
with the old preference scores. Because of the manner in 
which preference scores were calculated, there were widely 
different ranges across the four scales. For example, the 
maximum possible preference score for the F preference on 
Form G was 39 for males, while the maximum possible 
preference score for the T preference was 65. The same 
number therefore had different meanings depending on 
which preference was being considered. The same disparity 
occurred across scales as well. A score of F 30 on the T-F 
scale for a male indicated a very clear preference, while a 
score of E 30 on the E-1 scale (where the maximum is 53 
for E) indicated only a moderate preference. Standardizing 
the pci makes interpretation more straightforward. 

While the interpretation is made easier by the use of the 
pci, researchers must be cautioned that its use in correla- 
tions may attenuate the results. In any sample, the pci will 
have less variance than will the continuous scores. There- 
lore any correlations based on the pci, especially in samples 
of people with very clear preferences, may be lower than 
would he the case if continuous scores were used. 


Preference Clarity Categories To aid in interprctation 
and to lessen the chance that preference scores will be 
overinterpreted, many of the computer-generated inter- 
pretive reports associated with Form G display the pref- 
erence scores on a grid using bar graphs. The horizontal 
axis on this grid is labeled using four categories. Starting 
at the zero point and moving toward the end of the axis 
in either direction, the labels and the corresponding Form G 


preference scores are as follows: slight (1-9), moderate 


(11-19), clear (21—39, or 31 for F), and very clear (41 or 
higher, or 31 for F). 


Form M employs the same labels in the same order and 
refers to them as the preference clarity categories. The pec has 
two different sources: the pci of computer-scored forms and 
the raw points of template scored and self-scored versions. 
When using the computer-scored versions of Form M, 
these categories are associated with pci ranges as follows: 
slight (1-5), moderate (6-15), clear (16-25), and very clear 
(26-30). When using the template- and self-scorable versions 
of Form M, these categories are associated with ranges of the 
raw points for the preferred pole. Since each scale has a differ- 
ent number of items, and therefore a different number of pos- 
sible raw points, the ranges differ depending on the scale. See 
Table 5.4 for how to convert raw points into preference clarity 
categories. This table is printed on the self-scorable form and 
on the templates used in hand-scoring. 

As with Form G, the preference clarity categories are to 
be treated as heuristics to aid in interpretation, not as cut- 
off points for decision making. See Chapter 6 for recom- 
mendations on how all MBTI results are to be interpreted. 


Continuous Scores As with the previous versions of the 
MBTI, results are also available as continuous scores for use 
by researchers wishing to correlate MBTI scores with the 
scores of other instruments or criterion variables. The 
continuous scores are the values of 0 that result from IRT 
scoring. As such, they are available only for the computer- 
scored versions of the Indicator. 

When researchers desire to correlate MBTI scores with 
those of other instruments, it is important that they use the 
0 scores and not the preference clarity indexes. Because a 
pci is basically a compression of the full range of 0 on a 
given scale, it generally will have less variance than will the 
corresponding distribution of 0. This means that correla- 
tions based on the pci could suffer from restriction of range 
in certain samples and thus be attenuated. 


Determining the Midpoint 
of the Scales for Form M 


To determine the midpoint of each of the scales, additional 
analyses were conducted. Generally, with an IRT scoring sys- 
tem, the midpoint of the scale occurs at 0 = 0.0. However, 
given that precision around the midpoint is of primary 
importance for a type instrument, an external criterion was 
sought. The procedure of using an external criterion to set the 
division point is consistent with the history of MBTI develop- 
ments. The criterion used at this point to determine the n 
mal division point was s determined by another best-fit st 
Form M of the MBTI was administered to a number of 
different samples of adults and students. The individuals 
were participants in four-day MBTI qualifying workshops 
or in intensive individual feedback sessions conducted by 
experienced MBTI trainers. The responses were scored 
using the IRT item parameters, which yielded a 0 for cach 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI HB 


Table 7.6 Percentage of Agreement 
Between Unadjusted and Adjusted 
Form M Types and Best-Fit Type 


Agreement of Preference Agreement of 


Category Using Preference Category 
Scale Unadjusted Midpoint Using Adjusted Midpoint 
E-i 92% 93% 
S-N 92% 94% 
T-F 86% 92% 
]-P 9276 9576 
Overall 7276 7876 


TPE ONE Re CGU" ID- HOC) DNNILIUM ar I3 AIT LOI 9— 5:3 
Note N — 157, 


person. Each person in each sample also estimated his or 
her best-fit type. When all of the samples were combined, 
the total sample contained 157 individuals. For each scale 
the sample was divided into two categories, one for each of 
the preferences on that scale. The frequency of the pci was 
plotted for each category and then placed on the same scale. 
This allowed for a graphic examination of the effect of vari- 
ous placements of the midpoint for each of the scales. 

Prior to any adjustments (i.e., with the midpoint of all 
scales set at 0 = 0.0), the agreement between best-fit type 
and the type determined by the IRT scoring program was 
72%. As shown in Table 7. 6, the percentage of agreement 
using these unadjusted midpoints was 92% for the E-I, 
S-N, and J-P scales and 86% for the T—F scale. 

As shown in Table 7. 7, examination of the distributions 
of unadjusted preference clarity indexes for people of differ- 
ent best-fit preferences revealed a number of “misses,” with 
by far most of the misses being on only one scale. For 
example, a number of people who declared Feeling as a 
best-fit preference on the T-F scale had a pci on that scale 
indicating that they should be classified as a Thinking type. 
The same condition was observed on the S-N and J-P 
scales. Consequently it was determined that a slight adjust- 
ment to the midpoint of the S-N, T-E and J-P scales was 
warranted. The midpoint of the E-I scale was not changed. 
The adjustments were as follows: 


E-I None. 


S-N If the unadjusted preference clarity index is 
between O and I in the S direction, classify as N. 


T-F If the unadjusted preference clarity index is 
between 0 and 2 in the T direction, classify as E 


J-P If the unadjusted preference clarity index is 
between 0 and I in the J direction, classify as P. 


So, for example, if the pci for an individual was J 1, that 
person would be classified as a P, because in the best-fit 
sample these people had declared that P was a better fit than 
was J. A person whose preference and pci were ] 2 would 
still be classified as a J. Another factor considered when 


150 Research 


Table 7.7 Agreement on Number of Scales 
Between Unadjusted and Adjusted 
Form M and Best-Fit Types 


Unadjusted Adjusted 
Agreement on Form M Form M 
0 scales 0% 0% 
| scale | 26 076 
2 scales 476 476 
3 scales 23% 18% 
4 scales 72% 78% 


making the adjustments was to increase the number of peo- 
ple whose best-fit preference matched their Form M prefer- 
cnce without crcating any more mismatches. The goal was, 
therefore, absolute gain, not net gain. This is why there were 
no adjustments made to the midpoint of the E-I scale. Mov- 
ing the midpoint on this scale in either direction would have 
gained some matches but also created some mismatches. 

Another consideration was that the midpoint adjust- 
ment not create additional mismatches between Form M 
and Form G. Therefore, when an adjustment was consid- 
ered, the Form M preference clarity indexes were plotted 
against people whose Form G preferences were known in 
another sample, and the effect of the adjustment on the 
Form M-Form G match was examined. The adjustments 
described above created one more match in this compari- 
son and no additional mismatches. 

As can be scen in the above discussion, midpoint adjust- 
ments were made so as to more accurately classify people 
whose preference clarity indexes were in the “slight” range. 
People with preference clarity indexes of 1 or greater on S-N 
and J-P, and 2 or greater on T-E were unaffected by the 
adjustment, and some therefore remained with a reported 
type that does not match their best-fit type. For example, one 
person in the sample responded to most of the S-N items on 
Form M in the N direction but identified S as his best-fit pref- 
erence on the S-N scale. It was generally true that in the few 
instances when this occurred it occurred for the same person 
on more than one scale. In other words, some of the overall 
“misses” on whole type were due to people who had misses 
on more than one scale. In three cases where this occurred, 
the professional interpreters were contacted and asked if they 
recalled these people and if so to describe them. For all three 
of these people, the trainers had observed that during the 
workshop they had used an interpersonal style that made 
positive interaction with others difficult. One hypothesis, if 
this anecdotal finding holds up, is that when mismatches 
occur between best-fit preference and reported preference for 
which the person has high preference clarity indexes on the 
mismatched scales, this may be the result of poor type devel- 
opment. Another hypothesis is that there are strong environ- 
mental pressures toward certain preferences felt by these 


Table 7.8 Items per Scale and Item 
Formats for Form M and Form G 
Items per Scale Form M Form G 
E-I 2l 21 
S-N 26 26 
T-F 24 23 
J-P 22 24 
Total 93 94 
Word pairs 47 45 
Phrases 46 49 





individuals either during completion of the instrument or 
during the verification process. 

Once the appropriate pci cutoffs were established for each 
scale on the basis of the best-fit type data, the thetas required 
to produce those preference clarity indexes were determined 
and the scoring program was changed accordingly. 


Properties of Form M 


In this section the properties of Form M are described and 
in some cases compared to those of Form G. Some statistics 
on Form G are included here because the comparisons can 
help in understanding the changes made in moving from 
Form G to Form M. For a complete reporting of the charac- 
teristics of Form G see Myers and McCaulley (1985). 
Because Form M is now considered the standard form of 
the Indicator, the emphasis here is on presenting data that 
describe Form M. Topics covered in this section include 
comparison of the number of items per scale and of each 
format for both forms. This is followed by information 
about the frequency of omissions for Form M as well as a 
comparison of the types resulting from Form M and Form 
G. We also look at information relating to the “purity” and 
independence of the preference scales, including item-to- 
scale correlations and scale intercorrelations for both forms. 
The characteristics ol the national sample used as the basis 
of the Form M item selection and scoring procedures are 
presented. Finally, we discuss an analysis of DIF in Form M 
by gender and age. 


Item Comparison 


Form M consists of 93 items, onc less than the number of 
scored items on Form G. Table 7.8 shows the breakdown by 
scale and by item format for both Form M and Form G. 
These figures demonstrate that few changes were made in 
the number of items per scale or in the number of items of 
different format in moving from Form G to Form M. 


Table 7.9 Frequencies of Omissions 
on Form M 


Omissions n % Cum. % 
0 25272 83% 83% 
| 283 976 9276 
2 72 2% 95% 
3 54 2% 97% 
4 33 1% 98% 
5 20 126 98% 
6 10 0% 99% 
y 9 0% 99% 
8 25 1% 100% 
9 8 0% 100% 

10 | 0% 100% 
[I | 0% 100% 





Note: N = 3,036. See Appendix for a descripuon of the sample. 


Source: National sample 


Another similarity between the two forms is evident in the 
ordering of the items on Form M. The ordering was designed 
to correspond to that of Form G as much as possible. All 
items on Form M that were taken directly from Form G were 
placed, to the extent possible, in exactly the same position on 
Form M as they appeared on Form G. When a Form G item 
was dropped, every attempt was made to place a new or 
revised item from the same scale in that position on Form M. 
The ordering of items thus provides a strong sense of conti- 
nuity for MBTI users and in addition retains many effects of 
having the items ordered in the manner designed by Myers. 

Longtime users of Form G will note that most of the new 
or revised items that were introduced with Form M occur on 
the second half of the form. For example, among the first 
50 items on Form M are 39 items from Form G. These were 
the items on Form G that had the greatest power to differen- 
tiate people of opposite preferences and were therefore also 
those items that carried weights of 1 and 2 for their responses. 
Items in the second half of Form G were more likely to carry 
weights of 0 and, 1, and it was these items that were more 
often replaced by new or revised items on Form M. 


Omissions on Form M 


As with Form G, omissions are permitted on Form M in the 
belief that greater validity is achieved by the elimination of 
doubtful answers. Type can then be indicated by preferences 
to the item responses a person is reasonably sure about, 
uncontaminated by guessing. The IRT scoring program uses 
all of the information available in producing a type. In prac- 
tice, there are typically few omissions. Table 7.9 shows the 
frequency of omissions on Form M. As can be seen in this 
table, 83% of the respondents answered all of the items and 
9496 left no more than two blank. A person may lcave a large 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 151 


number of blanks on an answer sheet for a number of rea- 
sons: a lack of understanding of the vocabulary or sentences 
due to low reading ability in English; an inability to indicate 
prelerences by responding to MBTI items; or a conscious 
desire not to reveal oneself, perhaps due to misunderstand- 
ing of or lack of trust in the testing environment. 

More important than the total number of omissions is 
the number of omissions per scale. For exampie, 12 omis- 
sions spread evenly across all four scales will cause less of 
a problem than if all 12 occur on one scale, or two. So that 
both respondents and interpreters can take this into 
account during the interpretation process, omissions per 
scale are reported on most MBTI computer-scored narra- 
tives and profiles. In addition, if there are a number of omis- 
sions above a certain level per scale, this fact is flagged and a 
cautionary comment is printed. Specifically, this occurs if 
there are more than four omissions on the E-I or J-P scale 
and more than five omissions on the longer S-N and T-F 
scales. These cutoffs were determined by examining scale 
reliabilitics for people with different levels of omissions. 


Relationship Between Form M 
and Form G Results 


A sample of 101 adults from a church congregation in a small 
Midwestern town were administered both Form G and Form 
M at the same time. The mean age of the sample was 48 years 
(SD = 18), and the sample was composed of 61% females. 
The relationship between the two forms is shown in Table 
7.10. The overall agreement of whole types was 60% between 
the two forms, which is somewhat better than what would be 
expected given the level of agreement on the independent 
scales (i.e., if we assume that the scales are independent and 
multiply the percentage of agreement on all four seales, the 
probability of overall agreement would be 54%). Because a 
persons whole type is determined by his or her preferences 
on the four separate scales, the overall agreement between 
the two forms is somewhat constrained by the level of agree- 
ment on the four scales. 

lt is interesting to note that the lowest agreement is on 
the S-N scale, which is the longest scale but also the one 
with the greatest number of Form G items retained on 
Form M. The sample on which these data are based was 
predominantly S. Changes for a number ol these people 
who scored around the midpoint on either form may be the 
cause of the lower level of agreement on this scale. 

In conclusion, it should be noted that the level of 60% 
agreement between Form G and Form M on whole types is 
actually higher, and in some cases quite a bit higher, than is 
observed between two adminstrations of Form G in 10 of 
the 11 studies reported in the 1985 MBTI Manual. 


Item-to-Scale Correlations 


In the development of the MBTI, item analyses always 
included both item-to-seale correlations and prediction 
ratios fot cach response to all scales, not simply the scale for 


152 Research 


which the item was designed. Any item that loaded simi- 
larly on more than one scale was eliminated. On Form G, 
biserial correlations computed between the retained items 
and the scores of other scales had a median absolute corre- 
lation range of .07 to .12, as compared to a range of .43 to 
55 when correlated with the items own scale, 

The item-to-scale correlations for Form M are shown in 
Table 7.11. As expected, the median correlations of the 
Form M items on each scale are considerably higher with 
their own scale than with the other three scales. The only 
exception to this trend is the moderate correlation of S-N 
items with the J-P scale, and vice versa. 


Scale Intercorrelations 


Intercorrelations of continuous scores for the Form G data- 
bank sample and for various Form M samples arc shown in 
Table 7.12. These figures give an estimate of the size of 
intercorrelations to expect, depending on the distribution 
of types in a particular research sample. In naturally occur- 
ring samples, larger than expected scale intercorrelations 
can often be attributed to a greater representation than nor- 
mal of a particular preference. There was also a trend in the 
Form G analyses (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985, Table 9.7) for 
intercorrelations between J-P and S-N, and J-P and T-E 
higher in older age groups. 

As expected, the largest correlations in the Form M sam- 
ples are almost always between S-N and J—P, and some sam- 
ples also show a relationship between T-F and J-P. The 
intercorrelation between the S-N and J-P scales for Form M 
is similar to, if not somewhat higher than, the correlation 
between these two scales for the Form G databank, 
although this difference is likely attributable to the hetero- 
geneous nature of the databank sample. 

The correlations show that Sensing types are more likely 
to be J, and Intuitives are more likely to be P. The positive 
correlations between S-N and J-P probably reflect a fact 
about the types themselves. Sensing types typically prefer to 
rely on past experience and dislike unexpected events that 
require a rapid assessment of new possibilities. A preference 
for Judging leads to a life that is planned and consistent, 
decreasing the numbers of such unexpected events. Intn- 
itive types, on the other hand, are attracted to luture possi- 
bilities and new constructions of events. The Perceiving 
attitude kecps the door open to an incoming strcam of these 
new possibilities. 


Differential Item Functioning 


After the 93 items were chosen for Form M, the differential . 


item functioning (DIF) analysis was repeated to once again 
examine any possible differential effects of items by gender 
or by age. Although both item- and scale-level analyses 
were performed, the main focus of these analyses was on 
the test-level DIF results, which directly provide an index of 
the “bottom line” difference that would be expected on the 
basis of demographic factors when the MBTI is used in 
practice. That is, it is relatively common to find that a few 


Table 7.10 Relationship Between 
Form M and Form G 
in a Sample of Adults 5 


Correlation Between Percentage of Agreement 





Scale Continuous Scores in Classification 
E-I .90 90% 

S-N 87 79% 

T-F .89 87% 

J-P 89 87% 
Overall 60% 
Agreement 


Note: N = 101 See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source Trinity Lutheran Church. 


individual items exhibit low to modest levels of DIF at the 
item level (e.g., Drasgow, 1987); however, such effects typi- 
cally become a practical concern only to the extent that 
they exert a significant distorting effect that is visible at the 
scale level of analysis. 

For the item-level DIF results, values of the Mantel- 
Haenszel (M-H A) statistic (an index of both the magnitude 
and direction of the DIF) that exhibit a significant chi- 
square and are in excess of 1.5 are viewed as being poten- 
tially "significant" in magnitude. With respect to interpret- 
ing the individual M-H A, the sign of each statistic indicates 
whether the "focal" group (females in the sex-DIE and 
young/old individuals in the age-DIF comparisons) scores 
above or below the “reference” group (males, or middle- 
aged). Thus negative values for the gender comparison on 
the J-P scale would indicate that in a group of females and 
males that are matched with respect to clarity of their MBTI 
preference, females will be less likely to choose the keyed 
(P) response to the item than will males. 

The test-level M-H A results for gender and age are graphi- 
cally summarized in Figures 7.5-7.8 for gender-based DIF 
and in Figures 7.9-7.12 for age-based DIF. Each of these 
figures shows test characteristic curves (TCC) for each of the 
comparisons. TCCs arc exactly analogous to the item char- 
acteristic curves shown earlier, but instead of modeling the 
probability of responding to a given item in the keyed direc- 
tion, they show probability of responding in the keyed 
direction on the entire scale. 

In Figures 7.5-7.12 the expected difference between sub- 
groups in terms of total numbers of items endorsed in the 
keyed direction is shown; as an inspection of these results 
rcadily indicates, these TCCs are quite close across much of 
the scale and typically much closer at the type cutoff points. 
The age-based results are somewhat larger than the gender- 
based DIF at the points of maximum divergence, which is 
likely due to the fact that some of the items showing age 
DIF were retained because they were believed to tap devel- 
opmental differences that should not be eliminated from the 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 153 











Table 7.11 Item-to-Scale Correlations for Form M 

Items E- Scale S-N Scale T-F Scale J-P Scale 

E- items Median .52 —|1 —07 —.04 
Minimum .43 —25 —,17 —.14 
Maximum .76 .03 .05 Ol 

S-N items Median ~—10 53 06 28 
Minimum —.15 .38 -.17 10 
Maximum —.04 .65 25 39 

T-F items Median —.06 .05 .53 zl 
Minimum —-.13 —.06 .36 —.04 
Maximum .00 .20 .65 2l 

J-P items Median 205 .30 10 59 
Minimum —.14 12 —.04 .39 
Maximum 03 46 .3l .72 


(es a ee ee ee IE 7. eee 


Table 7.12 
Sample N E-I:S-N E-I:T-F 
Form G 
Form G databank 32,671 — 08 —.07 
Form M 
National sample 3,036 —.18 —12 
CRI sample 154 —.20 —.16 
Trinity Lutheran Church 0l —24 —07 
Employee Career 
Enrichment Program 98 —.04 03 
Test-retest sample 424 —.25 APA 
lowa State University 279 —.13 —18 
Middle TN State University 198 —06 —.04 
Fairview Health Services 261 —.10 -.10 


Intercorrelations of Continuous Scores for Form G and Form M 


E-1:J-P S-N:T-F S-N:J-P T-F;J-P 
E 13 38 2l 
—.09 no 47 48 
L OF 08 49 20 
-20 40 53 35 

07 T2 49 239 
—.19 B 38 27 
—.19 22 54 28 
-44 26 Al 09 
—10 ~06 42 08 


‘Sara ee de S AU o2 pL HR ACC WD TT WEN eT a Se IPIE a 


Note: See Appendix for a description of the samples. 


instrument. Even at their largest, however, the expected 
cross-subgroup cumulative differences in item responding 
represent only a fraction of a single item response, suggesting 
that whatever DIF is present is relatively minor, and/or it 
effectively “cancels out” across the items in each scale when 
scale-level scores are estimated. 

The results of the M-H A analyses at the item level were 
also quite positive, showing that for the gender and age com- 
parisons no E-I items exceeded the 1.5 cutoff on gender, and 
only one did in the two columns of age comparisons (i.e., 
young versus middle-aged and old versus middle-aged); for 
S-N, no items did; for T-F only one item exceeded the 1.5 
cutoff (on old versus middle-aged); and for J-P, two items 


exceeded this minimum cutoff for the gender-DIF analyses. 
However, if the more stringent cutoff of A = 2.0 for targeting 
potential problem items is used, no items from any of these 
scales can be flagged as producing appreciable levels of DIF 
when using the M-H A technique. 

In summary, these results are consistent with earlier DIF 
studies of the MBTI in showing that there does not appear to 
be any appreciable cumulative DIF on the basis of age or gen- 
der across the four MBTI scales. The fact that the T—F scale, 
which in the past used a gender-based differential scoring 
system, exhibited some of the lowest levels of DIF in these 
analyses can be viewed as a compelling argument for doing 
away with subgroup-based scoring systems for the MBTI. 


154 Research 


21 = um females 
amm males 


o 


Probability 


ET zi 0 
Theta 


Figure 7.5 E-I Test Characteristic Curves for Men and Women 


30-1 - mm m females 
amm males 


20 
m 
5 
B 
© 
a 

10 

0 

= = 0 
Theta 


Figure 7.7 T-F Test Characteristic Curves for Men and Women 





30 


m mm females 
amem males 





20 
E 
Fa 
5 
O 
a 

lO 

0 

=p.) zl 0 | 2 
Theta 


Figure 7.6 S-N Test Characteristic Curves for Men and Women 


30 m m m females 
mam males 





20 
[a 
3B 
5 
9 
a. 

10 

0 

— a 0 | 2 
Theta 


Figure 7.8 J-P Test Characteristic Curves for Men and Women 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI — 155 





30 m mæ younger 
mums Older 





m mm younger 
mmm Older 


21 





Probability 


o 


Probability 





ao - 0 | 2 
Theta Theta 


Figure 7.10 S-N Test Characteristic Curves for Older and 


Figure 7.9 E-l Test Characteristic Curves for Older and Younger 
Younger Respondents 


Respondents 
30 m m m younger 22 a ma younger 
mus Older mmum Older p 


Probability 
Probability 


. o 





Theta Theta 


Figure 7.12 J-P Test Characteristic Curves for Older and 


Figure 7.11 T-F Test Characteristic Curves for Older and 
Younger Respondents 


Younger Respondents 


156 Research 


The National Sample and the 
National Representative Sample 


A national sample of adults over age 18 was collected and 
used for the item analyses for Form M. This was the first 
time a national sample was used for MBTI item analyses. 
Results from this sample of about 3,000 people are pre- 
sented in various places in this chapter and in other chap- 
ters. In most plaees in this manual, where the national sam- 
ple is referred to, it mcans this entire data set, with no 
adjustments made to mode! the population. (The charaeter- 
istics of this sample are described in the Appendix.) This is 
because for most calculations it is more important to have 
raw data from a large sample. In some instances, however, 
it was desirable to have a national representative sample 
(NRS), which is described below. The NRS was used when 
the distribution of types in a sample of intcrest was being 
compared to a base population. In these instances, the base 
population was the NRS. 

The raw data trom the national sample did not entirely 
achieve the goal of representing the U.S. adult population 
because, as with previous attempts to collect a national sam- 
ple, White women tended to be overrepresented among 
those who returned the survey forms, and Black men tended 
to underrespond. While national random phone surveys 
generally yicld an adequate representation of minority group 
members, this was not the case with the MBTI sampling. 
Apparently members of minority groups arc less likely to 
complete psychological instruments than they are to com- 
plete political or other sociological surveys. Therefore, 
because the goal was to show the distribution of types in a 
national representative sample (NRS) of the U.S. population, 
the data trom the national sample were recompiled. 

Two different methods were used to arrive at a represen- 
tative sample. After applying the two methods, the type and 
preference distributions were caleulated on both revised 
samples. The goal of both methods was to have a final sam- 
ple that matched the 1990 U.S. census on gender and ethnic 
group. It was not possible to match for age beeause the 
national sample included only those 18 years and older. 

One method of achieving the target representation was 
to start with the entire national sample and then randomly 
eliminate persons from categories that were overrepre- 
sented until the number of people in cach category 
matched the census targets. This method resulted in a sam- 
ple of 1,450 persons. The other method was to weight the 
results of people from the underrepresented groups in such 
a way that the final sample would mateh the census. This 
method resulted in a total sample of 3,009 persons. 

As would be expected, the two methods yielded almost 
identical distributions of types, with the largest difference 
being 1.6% for male ISTPs; most other differences were less 
than 0.5%. Consequently, since the weighted category 
method resulted in less loss of data, the national sample 
based on this method is reported here. 


Table 7.13 Characteristics of the National 
Representative Sample 


Group n % % in Census 
Males 1,478 49.1% 49.0% 
Females 1,531 50.976 51.0% 
White 2,495 83.3% 80.3% 
Black 411 13.7% 12.1% 
Other 89 3.0% 7.6% 


Note: N = 3,009. The sample size for the ethnic data was 2,995, reflecting 
the fact that 14 of the 3,009 people in the total sample did not indicate 
their ethnic group. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National representative sample. 


As with the previous national sample (Hammer &amp; 
Mitchell, 1996), the survey included Hispanic as an alterna- 
live in the ethnic identity category. However, the number of 
Hispanics is not reported with the main ethnic breakdown in 
the U.S. census. Therefore, solely for the purpose of compar- 
ing the demographics in the NRS with census demographics, 
the same strategy used by Hammer and Mitchell (1996) was 
used with the current sample. Those indicating Hispanic as 
their ethnic group in the current national sample were pro- 
portionally assigned to the White and Black categories. Note, 
however, that in the actual sample Hispanics were included 
and weighted proportionally as a separate group. 

Table 7.13 shows how the current national representa- 
tive sample compares to the census data by gender and eth- 
nic group. The primary difference is that the current 
national sample contains about half the percentage of peo- 
ple in the *other" ethnic group category. Otherwise the 
proportions closely match those of the 1990 U.S. census. 

Table 7.14 and Table 7.15 show the distribution of types 
and preferences for males and females in the national reprc- 
sentative sample, respectively. The distributions for Blacks 
and Hispanics are presented in Chapter 14 of this manual. 

Prior to this sample, the best estimate of the distribution 
of types in a national representative sample was the 1996 
sample reported by Hammer and Mitchell (1996), which 
used Form G and employed a rolling norms procedure. In 
this procedure, data are usually collected sequentially, going 
from one site to another, until the demographic characteris- 
tics of the overall sample (e.g., the percentage of people rep- 
resenting different age groups) matches predetermincd tar- 
get levels. 

In the current national representative sample, there are 
shghtly more Introverts than Extraverts among males, while 
the reverse is true for females. In the 1996 sample, Introverts 
were slightly more common for both genders. The propor- 
tion of Sensing types ts between 71% and 75% for both men 
and women, which is slightly more for the men than in the 
1996 sample. There are more Judging than Perceiving types 
in the new sample, and the percentages are similar to those 


Construction and Properties of the MBTI 157 


Table 7.14 Distribution of Types and Preferences for Males 
in the National Representative Sample 





E 679 (45.9%) 
IST) ISF) INTJ | 799 (54.176) 
242 119 49 S 1,060 (71.7%) 
. : . N 418 (28.320) 
(16.4%) (8.1%) (3.3%) T 835 (56.5%) 
ELELELLILI. CLLCLELIT sss F 643 (43.576) 
n J 769 (52.0%) 
P 709 (48.0%) 
ISTP ISFP INTP Pairs and Temperaments 
126 112 71 

i j 7 Ij 429 (29.0%) 
(8.5%) (7.6%) (4.8%) IP 370 (25.0%) 
EBSEBEBEBE ERBEEEBEN BEBEB EP 339 (22.9%) 
EJ 340 (23.0%) 
ST 6l6 (41.796) 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP EE 444 (30.0%) 
83 102 95 59 NF 199 (seo 
(5.6%) (6.9%) (6.4%) (4.0%) NE ee eae) 
SSSBES BEBEENB SBESBS sapa 5) 637 (43.1%) 
SP 423 (28.6%) 
NP 286 (19.4%) 
NJ 132 (8.9%) 

ESTJ ESFJ ENTJ 
Tas M m TJ 496 (33.6%) 
TP 339 (22.9%) 
(11.276) (7.576) (2.776) FP 370 (25.0%) 
BEBE BEEBESE BEBEBEBESB BON FJ 273 (18.5%) 
5 IN 200 (13.5%) 
EN 218 (14.7%) 
IS 599 (40.5%) 
ES 46| (31.2%) 
ET 347 (23.5%) 
EF 332 (22.5%) 
IF 311 (21.0%) 
IT 488 (33.0%) 


A L a a eS Se A LLA a de ee CUN ee eee E a 


Note: n = 1,478. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: Nauonal representative sample. 


in the 1996 sample. The biggest difference between the two 
samples is in the frequency of Feeling types. 

Research with best-fit type with Form G (Harris &amp; 
Carskadon, 1988; Kummerow, 1988; Walek, 1992b) had sug- 
gested that a signifieant proportion of people, particularly 
men, who had identified Feeling as their best-fit type were 
being reported on Form G as having a preferenee for Think- 
ing. There were two primary hypotheses offered to explain 
these results. One was that cultural changes occurring since 
the introduction of the Form G scoring weights (which were 
themselves a response to prior cultural changes) were caus- 
ing more pressure to respond in a Thinking manner. The 
other hypothesis was that the Form G weights had in fact 
overeorrected for previous changes, particularly for men. 

While with Form M there are still more men reporting 
Thinking and still more women reporting Feeling, the 
proportions have changed. There are now more people of 


both genders reporting Feeling—4+% of the men and 76% 
of the women, compared to 31% of the men and 61% of the 
women in the 1996 Form G sample. The proportion ol 
Thinking—Feeling types among men in the current Form M 
national sample is closer to the 60—40 split that Myers had 
targeted than is the Form G proportion. However, the fre- 
quency of Feeling among females has also increased. 


Conclusion 


The history of the development of the MBTI, which spans 
more than +0 years, is outlined in the first part of this chap- 
ter. This brief recounting demonstrates two things about the 
Indicator. First, every attempt was made during its long his- 
tory to keep the instrument as true as possible to the theory 


158 Research 


Table 7.15 


Distribution of Types and Preferences for Females 


in the National Representative Sample 


IST} ISFJ 
106 297 
(6.9%) (19.4%) 
BSEEBE EB ESSER EEE BES 


ISFP INFP 
152 71 
(9.995) 


ESFP 


(10.196) 


ESF] 
259 
(16.9%) 
BERBER BEBE SBE 


(4.6%) 


ENFP 
154 |48 
(9.7%) 





E 804 (52.576) 
| 727 (47.5%) 
5 |,146 (74.9%) 
N 385 (25.1%) 
d 375 (24.5%) 
F 1,156 (75.576) 
J 860 (56.2%) 
P 67 | (43.8%) 
INTP Pairs and Temperaments 
» lJ 44] (28.876) 
(1.8%) IP 286 (18.7%) 
EP 385 (25.1%) 
EJ 419 (27.476) 
si 284 (18.576) 
SF 862 (56.376) 
NF 294 (19.276) 
NT 9I (5.976) 
5J 758 (49.5%) 
oF 388 (25.3%) 
NP 283 (18.5%) 
NJ 102 (6.7%) 
TJ 229 (15.076) 
TP 146 (9.5%) 
EP 325 (34.376) 
FJ 631 (41.276) 
IN 136 (8.976) 
EN 249 (16.3%) 
IS 59 (38.676) 
ES 555 (36.376) 
En 193 (12.676) 
EF 611 (39.9%) 
IF 545 (35.6%) 
IT 182 (11.9%) 


a O a O a O a a a E E 


Note: n = 1,531. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National representative sample. 


of psychological types. All decisions concerning items, scor- 
ing, and validation were driven by the demands of the the- 
ory. The goal was to yield an instrument that could be used 
to reliably sort people into types, not to measure traits. 

Since its beginning, the Indicator has undergone constant 
scrutiny to determine ways to improve it. Changes were 
made to item wording, item formats, weights, standardiza- 
tion samples, and scoring procedures. All potential changes 
were measured against two standards—psychometric prin- 
ciples and theoretical congruence. This review of the Indi- 
cators development illustrates why in Chapter 2 of this 
manual the history of the MBTI is characterized as “A Tra- 
dition of Change." 

The revision of the MBTI described in this chapter, 
which culminated in the 93-item Form M, remained truc 


to this tradition. All decisions were guided by both theoret- 
ical and empirical criteria. Item response theory methods, 
derived from modern test theory, were used to select items 
that better discriminated between people of opposite pref- 
erences. An improvement was made in classification of 
respondents around the midpoint. À new scoring method- 
ology was introduced using the prediction of best-fit type 
as the criterion. This same criterion was also used to deter- 
mine the midpoint of the scales. For the first time, the 
standardization sample used as a foundation for scoring 
was based on a national sample of adults. These improve- 
ments in the psychometric properties of the Indicator, 
along with the data presented in the following chapters, 
suggest that users can continue to rely on the MBTI as a 
measure of psychological type. 


Reliability and 


Measurement Precision 


Internal Consistency 
Reliability Estimates 


Test-Retest Reliability Estimates 


Measurement Precision Using 
the IRT Method 


Conclusion 


his chapter addresses the reliability of the Myers- 

Briggs Type Indicator, particularly that of the new 
Form M. Data from the national sample (see Chapter 7 for a 
description) are presented. The first topic to be examined, 
internal consistency reliability estimates, includes discus- 
sion of two different methods: split-half reliability and coef- 
ficient alpha. To permit reliability comparisons with other 
instruments, we report continuous score reliability: esti- 
mates for the four preference scales. Sample characteristics 
that may affect reliabilities are also discussed. 


The second topic is test-retest reliability estimates, or 
replicability of results over time. Again we report continu- 
ous score reliability estimates for the four preference scales. 
However, since MBTI scale scores are assumed to reflect 
underlying dichotomies, and the major interest of most 
MBTI users is the consistency of remaining the same type, 
we also report reliabilities that reflect these hypothesized 
dichotomies. 

The concept of rcliability deals not only with estimating 
internal consistency and replicability over time but also with 
that part of the variance in reliability estimates that is attrib- 
utable to the characteristics of respondents. Ihe reliability 
estimates for the MBTI are expected to vary not only with 
the statistical procedures adopted but also with characteris- 
tics of the respondents such as gender and age. Separate reli- 
abilities are reported for these groups of respondents. 

An assumption derived from observations made during 
the construction of the MBTI instrument is that persons 


160 Research 





with a good command ol perception or judgment (i.c., with 
good type development) are more likely to be clear about 
their own preferences. They therefore will report their prel- 
erences more consistently. If these assumptions are correct, 
samples of older persons should have higher reliability esti- 
mates than samples of younger persons. Since the quality of 
perception and judgment is often evidenced by an individ- 
uals level of achievement, it is expected that in samples 
of persons of comparable age levels, those with higher 
achievement levels will also report their preferences more 
consistently, and thus these samples will evidence higher 
reliabilities than samples of their lower-achieving peers. 
Since the acquisition of good judgment is postulated to be 
the most difficult to develop, the T—F scale is expected to be 
particularly vulnerable to deficiencies in type development. 
Therefore, the lowest reliabilities in less effective samples 
are expected to occur on the T-F scale. 

The third topic in this chapter is measurement precision 
(and its converse, error) of the new Form M, an approach 
derived from applying item response theory (IRF; see Chapter 
7 for a full explanation of the theory) to the MBTI. 


Internal Consistency 
Reliability Estimates 


Internal consistency reliability is concerned with how con- 
sistently respondents answer the items on a given scale. The 
more consistency, the less “noise” in the measurement. One 
way to examine consistency is to divide the items that com- 
pose the scale into parts and then compare the parts with 
each other. This is usually done through various methods of 
splitting the scale into halves. Because of the unique nature 
of the MBTI, however, it is also possible to examine differ- 
ent parts, such as word pairs versus phrase questions. 
Another way to establish the consistency of the scale is 10 
use coefficient alpha to examine how responses to the items 
relate to one another. 


Split-Half Reliability 


One method of determining the internal consistency relia- 
bility of a scale is to split the item pool into two halves, 
compute the internal consistency of each half, and correct 
the result for the length of the scale. This last step is needed 
because, at least in the context of classical test theory, 
longer scales are generally more reliable or consistent. 

The usual procedure for determining which items to 
place in which half is to use random selection from the total 
set of items on the scale. The characteristics of MBTI items, 
however, suggested that the items be split using a logical 
split-half procedure. Each Form M scale was split into 
halves, taking all available item statistics into consideration 
and pairing items that most resemble each other. The follow- 
ing variables were considered in splitting the Form M items: 


Table 8.1 Internal Consistency (Corrected) 
of Form G and Form M 
Continuous Scores Based on 
Split-Half Correlations 
Sample . N E-! S-N T-F J-P 


Form G CAPT Databank 32,671 .82 .84 .83 .86 


MM =a 








Form M National Sample — 3,036 


————— 


——————— we 





Logical Split-Holf 

X Half .90 hy i21 22 
YHalf | | .91 .92 20 z 
Consecutive Split-Half 

X Half 991 -92 .89 92 
Y Half .90 22 :92 122 
Word Pairs Bd 93 92 .94 
Phrases .91 ail .90 95 


Note: See Appendix for a description of national sample. 


Item format (word pair versus phrase question) 
ltem-to-total correlations 

Average value of the IRT b parameter 

Maximum amount of item information (a function of all 
three IRT parameters) 

Subscale coverage 

Whether the item was an original Form G item or a new 
or revised item 


Another technique, the consecutive items procedure, 
was also used for splitting items for comparison purposes. 
In this technique, the first half of the items on the scale 
formed the X items and the latter half the Y items. 

Table 8.1 shows split-half reliabilities of continuous 
scores for Form M using both the logical split-half and the 
simple consecutive items procedure for the national sam- 
ple, both corrected using the Spearman-Brown formula. For 
comparison, the corrected reliabilities for Form G, based on 
the logical split-half procedure, are shown for people from 
the Center for Applications of Psychological Type (CAPT) 
Form G databank. These correlations demonstrate the 
improvement in reliabilities in Form M. They also demon- 
strate that the procedure used to split the items has no 
effect on the resulting coefficients. 





There is an improvement in reliability with Form M. 


Although the simple consecutive item procedure is 
much less time-consuming to perform, it yields almost 
identical results, perhaps because the ordering of the MBTI 
items on Form M produces much the same diversity and 
balance in the two item pools as does the logical procedure. 
Regardless of the method, the Form M reliabilities in the 
national sample are quite high. 


Table 8.2 Internal Consistency of Form M 
Continuous Scores Based on 








Coefficient Alpha 
Sample Gender N E-I S-N T-F J-P 
National Sample M,F 2,859 .9 .92 Il 92 
M 1,330 9] 93 90 93 
F 1,529 90 9I 88 92 
lowa State 
University ME 269 al 91 II 92 
CRI Sample MAE 140 89 .93 7 .94 
Trinity M,F 90 90 9I 94 92 
Fairview M.F 247 .93 .93 90 92 
M 37 93 93 9l .93 
F 210 .92 93 89 Si 
Middle Tennessee M,F 175 9) 87 88 9| 
State University m 7% 91 £87 86 88 
E 99 92 .86 .87 92 
Public Utilities M,F 240 95 95 93 94 
Company M 14 95 95 393 94 
F 126 .95 95 93 94 
Ball Foundation M.F 85 93 89 92 92 
Test Samples M.F 500 94 198 92 3 
(Combined) M 200 933 33 9| 33 
F 300 .94 93 91 94 
Retest Samples M,F 400 94 95 93 94 
(Combined) M IS] 94 95 93 A 
F 259 94 94 93 94 


Note: See Appendix for a descnption of the samples. 


The items were also split by item format, i.e., into word 
pairs and phrase questions for each scale. Alpha coefficients 
were then computed for each. The internal consistencies, 
corrected for scale length, are also shown in Table 8.1. 
There were no differences in the reliabilities across the two 
item formats. 


Internal Consistency Coefficients 
Based on Coefficient Alpha 


The internal consistency of the four MBTI scales was also esti- 
mated using coefficient alpha, which is the average of all of 
the item correlations. As the analysis with Form G in the 1985 
MBTI Manual demonstrated and the present analysis con- 
firms, there is little or no difference between coefficients 
determined by the split-half and coefficient alpha methods. 
Table 8. 2 shows internal consistency reliabilities estimated by 
coefficient alpha in the national sample and in a variety of 
other groups of both college students and adults. There are no 
differences in reliabilities for males or females in the samples. 


bm 


161 


Reliability and Measurcment Precision 
Table 8.3 Internal Consistency Reliability 

of Form M by Age Group 2 

and by Ethnic Group re 
Age Group N E-I S-N T-F J-P 
18-21 89 91 2 89 94 
22-25 145 .90 a 9i 92 
26-30 241 31 193 pl .93 
31—40 641 .90 Jl 91 vf 
4|—50 628 ol 2122 fe) 2 
5|—60 440 i21 22 2] 22 
61—70 347 .90 :21 2 92 
270 269 .91 .90 .89 .90 
Ethnic Group N E-I S-N T-F J-P 
Adults from National Sample 
African American 120 .88 .87 84 v 
Latino/Latina/ 
Hispanic 100 .88 .87 .90 zl 
Public Utilities 
Company og 93 5 .94 I 
College Students 
AfricanAmerican 105 F .80 .87 190 
American Indian 17 .96 .86 .87 on 
Asian or Pacific 
Islander 233 92] .82 .83 .89 
Latino/Latina/ 
Hispanic 28 .84 .86 .88 .90 





Note: See Appendix for a description of the samples. 


The Effect of Sample Characteristics 
on Reliability 


Gender, age, membership in a minority ethnic group, and 
developmental level can all affect how consistenily people 
respond to a certain set of items. Table 8.2 demonstrated that 
there are no gender differences in Form M reliahilities. Table 
8.3 shows internal consistency reliability coefficients by age 
group from the national sample and by cthnic groups derived 
[rom the national sample and from all of the college student 
samples collected during the revision. It must be remembered 
that a reliability coefficient is an index of the consistency of 
responses made by a particular group at a particular time to a 
specific set of items designed to measure a psychological con- 
struct. The coefficient is therefore limited by the amount of 
noise or error that derives from two sources. One source is the 
items themselves. How items are worded, and how consis- 
tently they, as a set, tap the construct of interest, will affect 
reliability. The other source of noise derives from characteris- 
tics of the individuals themselves. For example, their age or 
developmental level may affect how reliably they respond to 
a certain set of items. 


162 Research 


In the broad age range available in this sample, there 
appear to be few or no differences in reliabilities across age 
groups. However, the Form G reliabilities reported in the 
1985 MBTI Manual show lower reliabilities in age groups 
below 18 years, particularly on the I—F scale. It remains to 
be seen whether such a pattern will be observed with Form 
M; the thcory would predict that this would be the case. 
The 1985 Manual also suggested that lower reliabilities 
might be observed in samples of people in midlife. How- 
ever, as with Form G data reported in the 1985 Manual, 
there was no evidence to support the hypothesis with Form 
M. The only trend suggested in the Form M age group data 
in Table 8.3 is that the reliability of the J-P scale may 
decrease slightly in older samples. The trend is slight, how- 
ever, and should not be overinterpreted. 

The ethnic group data from the adults in Table 8.5 shows 
that the internal consistency reliabilities for the three ethnic 
group samples are comparable to those of the overall 
national sample, with the possible exception of the T-F 
scale for the African Americans from the national sample, 
which is somewhat lower. The college student reliabilities 
show somewhat lower reliabilities for African Americans on 
the S-N scale and for Asians or Pacific Islanders on the S-N 
and T—-F scales when compared to the reliabilities of the col- 
lege student samples in Table 8.2. 

The 1985 MBTI Manual also shows reliability coeffi- 
cients for Form G for a number of samples that exhibit 
characteristics related to development that are presumed by 
theory to affect how people might self-report their prefer- 
ences. These results ean be summarized as follows: 


8 Underachieving students show much lower consistency 
in responses than do “overachieving” or high-achieving 
students. The T-F scale, as predicted, is the most likely 
to be lower. 

B Among high school students, college preparatory stu- 
dents show higher reliabilities than do their classmates 
who are not in college preparatory courses. 

B Students in advanced placement show higher reliabili- 
ties than do other groups of students. 

@ Reliabilities are higher in groups with higher average 
intelligence as measured by standard intelligence tests. 
Intelligence scores may be related to MBTI reliability in 
two ways. First, intelligence can be scen as a result of 
cffective command of perception and judgment; that is, 
more information is taken in accurately, and better judg- 
ments are made. Second, more intelligent students typi- 
cally have a higher reading level and may have better 
understanding of the MBTI vocabulary. Greater under- 
standing leads to lower likelihood of random responding 
and thus greater consistency 

8m College and university samples have higher reliabilities 
than high school samples. 


These findings are in accord with type theory. People with à 
better command of perception and judgment, who are better 
able to understand the items, and who are more likely.to 


Table 8.4 Test-Retest Correlations of 
Form J Continuous Scores 
over a 30-Month Period 
E-I S-N T-F J-P 
Males .78 85 e 83 
Females .81 .80 10 .81 
Total .79 .83 62 82 





Note: N= T4. 


Source. From “Test-Retest Reliabilities of the Myers-Briggs [ype Indicator and the Type 
Differentiation Indicator over a 30-Month Period," by D. A Johnson, 1992, Journal of 
Psychological Type, 24. Copyright 1992 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with 
permission. 


accurately self-report their preferences will tend to respond 
more consistently to the items. To the degree that these 
characteristics are not present in the sample, one should 
expect lower reliability coefficients. Other than for research 
purposes, the MBTI should not be used routinely with such 
groups except as a stimulus for discussion. 


Test-Retest Reliability Estimates 


Test-retest reliability is an estimate of how stable a charac- 
teristic is over time. For the MBTI tool, test-retest reliabili- 
ties go beyond the typical computations of correlations for 
the four continuous scores. Practical questions revolve 
around the likelihood that on retest a person will come out 
the same MBTI type; that is, a person will choose the same 
pole of all four dichotomous domains. 

Reliabilities in this section include (a) correlations of con- 
tinuous scores, (b) the proportion of cases assigned the same 
letter (direction ol preference) on retest, and (e) the propor- 
tion of cases reporting the same preferences on retest for all 
four dichotomies (i.e., the same type), three preferenccs, two 
preferences, one preference, or no preferences. 


Correlations of Continuous Scores 


Before introducing Form M data, data are presented from a 
test-retest study based on an administration of Form J ( John- 
son, 1992). These data, not available for the 1985 MBTI 
Manual, are important because of thc long period between 
test and retest. Although the participants were administered 
Form J in this study, the continuous scores are derived from 
the same 94 items and weights as used on Form G. These 
coefficients are shown in Table 8.4. With the exception of the 
T—F scale for males, the test-retest reliability of the scales is 
quite good over a two-and-one-hall-year period. 

Table 8.5 shows test-retest product-moment correlations 
in three different samples for Form M and, for comparison, 





Table 8.5 Test-Retest f Form G 
and Form M Continuous Scores 


Sample Interval N E-I S-N T-F J-P 


Form G 
Meta-analysis &gt;9 months 559 J0 "68  .599 63 


Meta-analysis &lt;9 months 1,139 84 8I JU 182 


p NE e ee —— ~ ze&gt; ne a Án 


Form M 

VA 

Commonwealth 4 weeks 116 .94 .90 183 mm. 90 

Public Utilities 

Company 4 weeks 258 ge — [59 Bg. 93 

GPP 4 weeks 50 95 il 94  .95 

By pci range for 

combined sample E 1 

|-5 NL Ce 88 | 46 52 44 2^ 

6-10 | 78 83 n 73 5 

[1-15 be 62 87 87 84 89 

16—20 DM 62 70 EE g3 E 920 98 95 

21-25 64 0220 9007 NO5 193 

26-30 70 22 be E pria ay. 


Note: Form G data from Harvey (1996) based on Myers and McCaulley 
(1985). See Appendix for a description of the samples. 


the results of a meta-analysis of test-retest coefficients 
(divided into two different time intervals) that summarized 
all of the Form G data from the 1985 Manual (Harvey, 
1996). For the Form G data, the time intervals represented 
in the «9-month category are primarily for intervals of one 
to eight weeks, with one sample using an cight-month 
interval; for the &gt;9-month category the time intervals 
ranged from nine months to six years, with the majority at 
intervals of around two years. The length of time between 
testings for the Form M data was about one month and 
should therefore be compared with the Form G &lt;9-month 
interval. 


The test-retest reliabilities of Form M are generally higher 
than those of Form G. 


For both forms the reliability coefficient for T-F is the low- 
est of the four scales, especially in the student sample, as 
predicted. 

Test-retest reliabilities of continuous scores were also 
calculated for dilferent ranges of the preference clarity 
indexes (pci) and are shown in Table 8.5. To attain a suffi- 
cient number of people in each range it was necessary to 
combine all three test-retest samples. In these data there 
was a clear trend for the stability of the preference clarity 
indexes to be lower for those people whose original pci 
was low. This finding for Form M replicates a similar 
analysis for Form G using categorical data (Mycrs &amp; 
McCaulley, 1985). 


Reliability and Measurement Precision 163 


Table 8.6 Test Retest Percentage Agreement 
of Dichotomies for Form G 


and Form M 












Sample Interval N E-1 S-N T-F J-P 


Form G 


Meta-analysis &gt;9 months ies 75 76 1577 


&lt;9 months 356 82 87 82 83 


—— a n — a — M —" ————— ^ 


Meta-analysis 


a aha n 


Form M 
VA 
Commonwealth 4 weeks 116 87 87 84 88 
Public Utilities 
x „ Company 4 weeks 258 9I 92 84 89 
REPP 4 weeks 50 96 96 92 96 





Note: Form G data from Harvey (1996) based on Myers and McCaulley 
(1985). See Appendix for a description of the samples. 


! C | AS m C6 VA 
|, M3 * ju ; ow . DE. AA 


Agreement of Dichotomies 


Table 8.6 shows the test-retest percentages of agreement for 
the E-I, S-N, T-F, and J-P dichotomies in the three test- 
retest samples for Form G and Form M. The Form G coeffi- 
cients arc from the meta-analysis by R. J. Harvey (1996). 
The time intervals in the &lt;9-month Form G studies were 
five to eight weeks, with one sample of eight months. The 
intervals in the &gt;9-month category ranged from nine 
months to six years. The time interval for the Form M stud- 
ies was four weeks. The agreement across the scales is 
somewhat higher for Form M, with the T-E scale showing 
the lowest percentage agrecment on both forms. The high 
agreement in the Consulting Psychologists Press (CPP; 
publisher of the MBTI) sample probably represents an 
upper limit to test-retest reliabilities; most of the individu- 
als in this group were very familiar with type theory and 
had received an MBTI interpretation prior to the study. 

One of the studies using Form G that was included in 
the meta-analysis of test-retest studies deserves specific 
mention because it helps answer a question often asked by 
participants in workshops. This was a study of the effect of 
moods on reliabilities conducted by Howes and Carskadon 
(1979), who administered the MBTI instrument to intro- 
ductory psychology student volunteers. Mood changes 
were effected by asking three groups of students to com- 
plete one of three 50-item self-report questionnaires. The 
mood-elevating form contained positive, optimistic self- 
statements that most people could honestly agree with; the 
mood-depressing form contained negatively worded state- 
ments; a neutral form contained bland, nonpersonal attitude 
statements. A post-treatment measure of mood demon- 
strated that completing these forms had the intended effect 
on mood. The results showed that mood changes did not 
significantly affect test-retest MBTI correlations or percent- 
age of agreement on the preference scales. 

Another test-retest study is of interest for both historical 
and theoretieal reasons. Isabel B. Mycrs administered one of 


(4 f 
M ^ ui 3 uo. K^ = i $ 
jw gah 16 (pe v of, 420^ M 
164 Research Nw Sr T" mas mL gd dir ^ 4 
— 285 EEE- y FF 
D I, AF - 
/ Y x P W. 


Table 8.7 Percentage of People with 
Preferences the Same at 
Retest (Four Weeks) 


Number of Preferences 
the Same at Retest 


Sample N 4 3 2 I Oe 
VA ; 
Commonwealth 116 aS 38 4 3 0 

" mo. t 
Public Utilities bnc 4 Vl 
Company 258 66. 25 E: | 0 
CPP 50 80 20 0 0 0 
Combined 424 65 6 l 0 


Note: See Appendix for a description of the samples. 


the first forms of the Indicator to the 87 members of the 
Swarthmore high schoo] class of 1943. At the 50th reunion 
of this class, Katharine Myers (personal communication) 
administered Form G to 39 of these same people. Over this 
50-year period 8 people (21%) had the same type, 13 (33%) 
had changed one letter, 16 (41%) had changed two letters, 2 
(596) had changed three letters, and no one in the group had 
changed all four letters of his or her type. Over a 50-year 
interval, then, 5496 changed cither nonc or just one letter. 
The level of agreement expected by chance would be 6.2596. 
Thesc data suggest that personality preferences are fairly sta- 
ble over long periods of time but that there are some 
changes. Also note, however, that any changes over time 
observable in these data are compounded by changes in both 
the items and the scoring weights of the instrument itself. 

Table 8.7 shows thc percentages of persons reporting 
four, three, two, one, or no preferences the same on four- 
week retest. The chance probability of choosing all four 
preferences on retest (1.c., coming out the same type) is 
6.2596. The actual test-retest probabilities are significantly 
higher than what would be expected by chance. 

While significant improvements over chance have been 
observed, the test-retest agreement will never reach 100%, 
One ot the factors limiting test-retest agreement over time 
tor whole types (i.e., all four letters the same) is that whole 
types are arrived at by measuring the four scales separately. 
As discussed above, responses to the items on cach scale are 
subject to measurement error and to normal fluctuations in 
the behavior and characteristics of individuals that may 
affect how they self-report on certain items at certain times. 
When these factors are aggregated across the four scales, it 
creates a ceiling on the achievahle upper limit of agreement 
over time. For example, if we consider the categorical test- 
retest reliabilities of the preference scales for the samples 
shown in Table 8.6 as independent and multiply them 
together to arrive at an expectation as to what the agree- 
ment for whole types should be over time, the results are 
36%, 63%, and 81% for the three samples. These are very 
close to the actual figures of 55%, 66%, and 80% for the 


same samples shown in Table 8.7. To achieve test-retest 
agrcement on whole types over time in, say, the high 8096 
range, the test-retest reliabilities of the individual scales 
would all have to be over 9696, which is probably unrealis- 
tic for scales that measure such complex and multifaceted 
constructs as the MBTI preferences, and as it would be for 
any scale measuring a meaningful psychological construct. 

In conclusion, test-retest reliabilities of the MBTI show 
consistency over time. When subjects report a change in 
type, it is most likely to occur in only one preference, and in 
scales where the original preference clarity was low. 


Measurement Precision 
Using the IRT Method 


As was noted in Chapter 7 on the construction of Form M, 
the approach to estimating measurement precision that is 
taken by IRT is in some ways similat to—but in many ways 
quite different from—traditional CTT-based methods used 
to estimate test rcliability Both IRT and CTT view measure- 
ment precision as the relative degree to which test scores 
are frec from undesirable, unsystematic sources of variance; 
tests producing higher levels of precision are viewed as 
being more informative regarding each examinees true score 
on the underlying psychological characteristic of interest 
(in the present case, the preference clarity indexes on each 
MBTI scale). Both methods likewise define an index that 
provides a “mirror image" view of precision that is an 
inverse function of the index of measurement precision; 
this index is the standard error, or SE. Higher standard errors 
are associated with less precise, less informative tests. 

IRT and CYT differ fundamentally, however, regarding 
the concept of how test precision (or error) should be quan- 
tified. In CTT-based approaches, the result is a single esti- 
mate of the tests reliability for a given group, estimated 
using a technique such as coefficient alpha, or a test-retest 
correlation. Estimates based on these techniques were 
reported in the first part of this chapter. 

In contrast, IRT methods begin with the assumption that 
a single number is not adequate to quantity the precision (or 
degree of etror) present in a scale. Instead, the measurement 
precision of a scale is presumed to be able to vary continu- 
ously across the possible range of scores (the 0 in IRT termi- 
nology, ot the preference clarity index in the case of the 
MBII). As a consequence, instcad of producing a point- 
estimate of test precision, a scale developed or evaluated 
using IRT methods provides a graphical function that shows 
thc amount of precision that would be expected at any given 
levcl of 0. This approach reflects the commonsense notion 
that scales tend to be more precise for individuals who fall at 
some levels of 0 and less precise for other individuals. 

As demonstrated in Chapter 7, this was exactly the goal 
that Myers set in constructing the MBTI scales. All deci- 
sions about item wording, item selection, and sctting ol the 


p. í 2 UT. 


fay ff j 4 |j ZA f P 
i i a 
E id f a af 4 f s 
P a 
` 





| [4 P , a 
Ki [yas UW Las Ai "O kiia Reliability and Measurement Precision 165 
y e ^ j ; 


midpoint were made so as to maximize the precision 
around the midpoint of each scale. She was not interested in 
differentiating between people who demonstrated, for 
example, a clear versus a very clear preference for Extraver- 
sion. Instead, the goal was to make sure, to the extent possi- 
ble, that people with slight preferences on each side of the 
midpoint were classified accurately. IRT approaches to pre- 
cision provide a means to describe and evaluate the preci- 
sion or error at precisely this point. 

CTT-based indexes of measurement precision (i.e., relia- 
bility coefficients) will typically be unable to quantify or 
detect such phenomena. Although it would be possible to 
calculate reliability coefficients for subgroups of individuals 
representing different degrees of clarity of preference, the 
most commonly encountered CTT-based estimates of an 
instruments precision simply provide an overall, aggregate 
estimate of the instruments precision across the entire 
range of scale scores. Unfortunately, this global estimate of 
reliability is likely to overestimate measurement precision 
at the extremes and underestimate precision in the middle 
range of scores. Myers was well aware of this limitation of 
traditional reliability coefficients. Her attempt to overcome 
this deficiency, and to provide information about precision 
at the center of the scales, led her to use two kinds of cate- 
gorical coefficients for estimating reliability, phi and tetra- 
choric, which are used with variables that represent true or 
artificial dichotomies, respectively. Because phi was believed 
to overstate the reliability of the type categories and tetra- 
choric to understate the reliability, she was attempting to 
bracket the “true” reliability. Fortunately, the use of IRT 
techniques provides a more direct solution to the problem. 

The IRT equivalent of the CTT reliability coefficient is 
the test information function (TIF), which shows the amount 
of precision produced by the test at each possible value of 0; 
the IRT equivalent of the standard error of measurement 
(SEM) is the test standard error (TSE) lunction, which 
shows the expected SE that would be found when estimat- 
ing 0 scores from the observed item responses across the 
full range of possible 0 scores. These functions can be 
graphed, showing clearly how precision and error vary for 
different scores on the scale. 

Figures 8.1-8.4 present the IRT-based TIFs and TSE 
functions for the Form M item pools (solid line); the corre- 
sponding values for the Form G item pools (broken line) 
are provided in each plot for comparison purposes. As the 
results clearly demonstrate, the IRT assumption that test 
precision varies as a function of the particular range of test 
scores being considered is quite evident. Furthermore, mea- 
surement precision tends to be at its highest in the vicinity 
of the midpoint of each seale, exactly as would be desired 
for an instrument used to determine dichotomous prefer- 
ences. Test information functions such as seen in these fig- 
ures are the result of selecting items like those shown in 
Figure 7.2 in Chapter 7, that is, items that demonstrate 
steep slopes around the midpoint of the scale. 


"HA p UW MOL 
for the Form G versus M item pools. Figures 8.1—8.4 show a 
direct index ol the amount of measurement precision im- 
provement provided by the revised item pools. Likewise, the 
degree of decrease in the TSE functions provides an index 
of the reduction in error variance in the 0 score estimates. An 
inspection of the TIFs and TSE functions in Figures 8.1—8.4 
shows quite clearly that the Form M items produce apprecia- 
ble increases in test information and corresponding decreases 
in SE (especially in the critical region around the 0 = 0.0 
point, in which the cutoff is located). 

This improvement in test precision is always desirable, 
and it is especially so when a cutoff point is used. That is, 
any amount of error involved in estimating 0 scores near 
the cutoff point may translate into categorical type misclas- 
sifications. Thus, even if the reductions in the SE of estimat- 
ing 0 scores near the cutoff point are relatively modest, 
potentially important improvements in test-retest categori- 
cal type stability—as well as best-fit type agreement rates 
may be achieved as a result of the improved measurement 
seen in the Form M item pools. 








Conclusion 


The internal consistency of the four MBTI scales is quite 
high in all samples available to date, whether computed 
using logical split-half, consecutive item split-half, or cocf- 
ficient alpha. There has been a substantial improvement in 
Form M reliabilities over those of Form G, at least in the 
samples collected so far. 

A summary of the Form G data suggests, however, that 
sample characteristics, particularly those related to type 
development, may result in variation in reliabilities across 
groups. Groups composed of people who are believed to 
have less command over perception and judgment should 
exhibit lower reliabilities. 

Test-retest reliabilities of the MBTI show consistency 
over time, with levels of agreement much greater than by 
chance. When subjects report a change in type, it is most 
likely to occur in only one preference, and in scales where 
the original preference clarity was low. The test-retest relia- 
bilities of Form M are improved over those of Form G. The 
reliability coefficient for T-F remains the lowest of the four 
scales, as expected. 

A new method for estimating measurement precision is 
available with the use of IRT. This method is based on calcu- 
lating the amount of information that is available [rom each 
item that can be used to discriminate people of opposite pref- 
erences. The precision of all scales is greater for Form M. 


AA £ f 
P i AÁ 


"7. . " ul a - -g&gt; A M 
Also of interest is the comparison of the height óf the TIFs 


166 Research 





| Theta 


— — — — —- o 2 
Ww hb OHA “IO OO 


ITEMS m= ma FormG «emm Form M 


— hh 


o0 
» 
* 
@ 
B 
a 
a 
e 


E 
"a 
"uu; 


Q — MN Ww . Un HD SI QO 


EU FHS 22.0 =S =10 -05 0.0 0.5 1.0 i5 2.0 23 3.0 
Extraversion Theta Introversion 


E-I Test Information 


TSE Theta 
1.0 


0.9 &amp; 

0.8 * 
0.7 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4 


0.3 





0.2 ITEMS mmm formG mamm Form M 


0.1 


0.0 





239 285 220 = 5 -].0 z0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 
Extraversion Theta Introversion 


TSE Functions 


Figure 8.1 E-I Test Information and TSE Functions for Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 


Reliability and Measurement Precision — 167 


| Theta 


— — — — — — — N 
whl wan CO WOO 


ITEMS mwmmFornG æm Form M 


— N 








ay 
&lt;r 
T O 


O — Du .h UO 000 


71310 E2.5 220 IS —-1.0 3:005 0.0 0.5 1.0 ES 2.0 215 3.0 
Sensing Theta Intuition 


S-N Test Information 


TSE Theta 
1.0 


0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 

ITEMS mmmFornG mm Form M 
0.2 


0.1 


0.0 





EE 
n3. U m2 Z2 walks —-1.0 =0:5 0.0 0.5 1.0 I.5 2.0 25 3.0 
Sensing Theta Intuition 


TSE Functions 


Figure 8.2 S-N fest Information and TSE Functions for Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 


168 


Research 





ITEMS = smmFormG 


10 
p 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
| 
0 
RU 25 SAW) E 2-0 —0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 25 3.0 
Thinking Theta Feeling 


T-F Test Information 


TSE Theta 


|.0 


0.9 


0.8 


0.7 


0.6 


0.5 


0.4 


0.3 





ITEMS smmwFormG 
0.2 


0.1 


0.0 





=3.0 mas 2210 EIS 120 E05 0.0 0.5 1.0 I» 2.0 25 3.0 
Thinking Theta Feeling 


TSE Functions 


Figure 8.3 T-F Test Information and TSE Functions for Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 


Reliability and Measurement Precision — 169 


13 ITEMS mmmFormG mmm Form M 


By 
us 
Rany 


O.N wth O* - CO VV 


EIQ m2 -2.0 sls = 10 cn 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 ZI 3.0 
Judging Theta Perceiving 


J-P Test Information 


TSE Theta 
1.0 


$ 
0.9 + 
0.8 
0.7 
0.6 


0.5 





0.4 


a 
03 "Sean? 





0.2 ITEMS mae FormG mmm Form M 


0.1 


0.0 





3.9 pra. -2.0 zi zn 29:5 0.0 0.5 1.0 15 2.0 2.8 3.0 
Judging Theta Perceiving 


TSE Functions 


Figure 8.4 J-P Test Information and TSE Functions for Final Form M Versus Form G Item Pools 





Validity of the Four 
Preference Scales 


Validity of Whole Types 
and Type Dynamics 


MBTI Research Resources 


Conclusion 


Validity 


ecause the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator personality 

inventory was designed to implement Carl G. Jungs 
theory of psychological types, its validity is determined by 
its ability to demonstrate relationships and outcomes pre- 
dicted by theory. The theory suggests that persons are, or 
become, different types, and the MBTI attempts to classify 
persons according to the type that they believe best fits 
them. The theory postulates that the basic preferences for 
Sensing or Intuitive perception lead to different interests 
and that basic preferences for Thinking or Feeling judg- 
ment lead to differences in acting on those interests. Moti- 
vation, values, and behaviors are seen as surface indicators 
of the effects of the basic preferences and attitudes. If Jung's 
theory describes preferences that do exist, and if the MBTI 
adequately indicates those preferences, then surface behav- 
iors should be in the directions predicted by the theory, 
with allowances, of course, for measurement error in the 
instrument, stage of development of the person, and over- 
riding environmental pressures that interfere with expres- 


sion of type preferences. 


171 


172 Research 


There are two broad categories of evidence that can be 
brought to bear on the issuc of the validity of MBTI results. 
The first category includes evidence for the validity of the sep- 
arate preference scales that compose the Indicator. This is the 
level at which measurement takes place with the MBTI. Since 
the separate preferences are the component parts needed to 
achieve the goal of helping people identity a whole type, it is 
important to establish the validity of the separate scales. Evi- 
dence falling into this category includes the following: 


B Factor analysis of MBTI item pools 

8 Correlations of MBTI continuous scores for each scale 
with scores from the scales of other instruments 

B Categorical analysis of behaviors believed to be associ- 
ated with people of different preferences 

B Analyses designed to uncover dichotomies 

B Analysis of brain activity patterns 


The second category of evidence concerns the validity of 
whole types or of particular combinations of preferences, 
particularly those combinations that have theoretical 
importance. The primary goal in using the Indicator is to 
help a person arrive at a complete four-letter type. It is 
therefore important to show that each of the 16 types has 
unique characteristics and that these characteristics are not 
entirely predictable from knowledge of the separate prefer- 
ences. According to type theory, there are dynamic relations 
among the functions and attitudes that make up a persons 
type that suggest characteristics or behaviors that may not 
be apparent at a preference-scale level of analysis. Predic- 
tions can be made and tested based on the person’s domi- 
nant and auxiliary functions and the functions that the per- 
son extraverts and introverts. 

The evidence for this category includes the following: 


Comparison of MBTI reported type with best-fit type 
Analysis of type distributions 

Analysis based on analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
Observations by independent raters 

Analyses involving whole types as the unit of analysis, 
including attraction and satisfaction in couples, rebellious- 
ness and distress in veterans, and type and time orientation 
8 (Comparisons with factor scores derived from other 
measures 


The application chapters that follow in this manual also 
contain a wealth of data and analyses that are relevant to the 
validity of the MBTI at both levels—preferences and whole 
types. These topics will not be repeated here. 


Validity of the Four Preference Scales 


Factor Analyses 


The factor structure of MBTI item pools provides evidence 
ol the construct validity of the MBTI assessment tool. When 
cxamining factor analytic studies it is important to select an 


item pool that is appropriate for the question being asked. If 
the research question involves the four preference scales, 
then the items of interest are only those items that are used 
to score the four preference scales of the MBTI. These are 
the 94 items that constitute the Form G or Form F scoring 
or the 93 items that are used in the new Form M scoring. 
With the exception of the Form G self-scorable and the new 
Form M, other forms of the MBTI (i.e., Forms G, K, and J) 
contain research items, or items used to score for subscales, 
or both. If these additional items are unwittingly included, 
as they have been, in a factor analysis designed to test the 
four-factor structure of the MBTI, the results will, not sur- 
prisingly, be other than predicted, as more than four factors 
arc likely to emerge. 

Once the appropriate set of items has been selected, the 
appropriate factor analytic tool must also be used. Two 
basic kinds of factor analytic studies can be performed: ex- 
ploratory and confirmatory factor analyses. Exploratory fac- 
tor analysis is the most widely used, although it provides 
only limited information about a hypothesized factor struc- 
ture of a set of items. Although very useful for the purpose 
of developing hypotheses with respect to the factor struc- 
ture of an instrument, exploratory factor analysis is not par- 
ticularly useful in testing the degree to which an already 
hypothesized structure fits the observed data. Since with 
the MBTI there is a clearly hypothesized structure based on 
theory—the four-factor model that represents the four pref- 
erence scales—confirmatory studies will yield more infor- 
mation about the construct validity of the MBTI. The dis- 
cussion of these two kinds of factor analyses below relies on 
the review by Harvey (1996). 


Exploratory Factor Analyses In an exploratory factor 


analysis of the MBTI, basically two possible outcomes can 
occur. First, the exploratory analysis can produce a factor 
structure that appears to be similar to the hypothesized 
structure. However, because the exploratory factor model is 
unrestricted in a statistical sense, an infinite number of 
other equally well-fitting models can also exist that would 
provide an equally plausible fit to the data. Second, the 
exploratory analysis could instead produce a factor 
structure that is different from the predicted structure (e.g., 
it may contain a different number of factors, or the items 
may not load on the factors in the predicted fashion). 

Several exploratory studies of the MBTI have produced 
results that are virtually identical to the hypothesized four- 
factor model: e.g., Harvey, Murry, and Stamoulis (1995); 
Thompson and Borrello (1986); Tzeng, Outcalt, Boyer, 
Ware, and Landis (1984). Tischler (1994), analyzing a large 
sample, found *unusually strong evidence that MBTI items 
are correlated with (measure) their intended scales; the 
scales are almost factorially pure” (p. 30). 

There have also been two instances reported in the liter- 
ature where the predicted factor structure was not obtained: 
Comrey (1983) and Sipps, Alexander, and Friedt (1985). 
Both of these studies can be questioned regarding one or 


more of the decisions made when conducting their analyses 
(e.g., retaining factors based on questionable criteria; forc- 
ing an orthogonal rotation on the data; using samples with 
very low ratios of subjects to items; using the principal 
components model when it is obvious that MBTI items con- 
tain considerable levels of unique variance). The factor 
structures that emerged from both these studies were tested 
against the predicted four-factor structure using the more 
rigorous confirmatory approach, which is discussed in the 
following section. 


Confirmatory Factor Analyses Confirmatory factor 
analysis (e.g., James, Mulaik, &amp; Brett, 1982; Jóreskog &amp; 
Sórbom, 1981) is able to provide a much more definitive 
test of the plausibility of a hypothesized factor structure 
than is the exploratory approach. In a confirmatory factor 
analysis a specific structural model is fitted to the data. If a 
model fits poorly, then the hypothesized factor structure is 
disconfirmed. However, as with any model-testing method, 
even if the hypothesized model fits well, such a finding does 
not prove that the hypothesized model is “correct.” There 
may be other models, not vet tested or even thought ol, that 
demonstrate a similar or even better goodness of fit. 
Consequently, confirmatory techniques are most powerful 
when they are used to compare the performance of 
competing models. 

Several confirmatory factor analyses have been con- 
ducted on the MBTI. Johnson and Saunders (1990) analyzed 
the subscales produced by the Step I] scoring system of 
Form J. The results indicated clear support for the plausibil- 
ity of the predicted hierarchical structure of the instrument 
(i.e., the subscale-to-overall-preference-scale relationships). 

Thompson and Borrello (1989) evaluated the fit of the 
hypothesized four-factor model, concluding that it fit well 
in their sample. Neither these researchers nor Johnson and 
Saunders, however, tested any competing models against 
which the reported levels of fit could be compared. 

Harvey et al. (1995) did test three competing views of 
the latent structure of the MBTI. The three models were the 
predicted four-factor model and the two five-factor models 
developed by Sipps et al. (1985) and Comrey (1983) in 
their exploratory factor analyses. The results of the Harvey 
et al. (1995) study provided strong support for the validity 
of the predicted four-factor model. In contrast, the Sipps et 
al. and Comrey five-factor models both exhibited severe 
flaws that suggested that they were fundamentally misspec- 
ifed (e.g., factor correlations approaching 1.0). 

A confirmatory factor analysis was also conducted on 
Form M, using the data from the national sample (N = 3,036; 
see Chapter 7 for the characteristics of this sample). The 
software package PRELIS 2 was used to obtain polychoric 
correlations and asymptotic variance matrices suitable for 
dichotomous items. The matrices were used by LISREL 
8.12 software running the diagonal weighted least squares 
procedure to estimate the model (Jóreskog &amp; Sórbom, 
1981). Also, because the S-N and J-P scales are known to 


Validity 173 


correlate, the latent variables were allowed to correlate. The 
adjusted goodness of fit was .949 and the nonnormed fit 
index was .967. The median of the fitted residuals was 
~.008. These results indicate an excellent fit to the four- 
factor model. 

In sum, when the exploratory and confirmatory factor 
analytic results are viewed together, there is strong support 
for the construct validity of the MBTI. Several large-sample, 
carefully conducted exploratory studies produced “text- 
book" four-factor structures that almost exactly matched the 
hypothesized pattern of loadings (Harvey, 1996). Of even 
greater importance, several confirmatory studies of both 
Form G and Form M have unanimously supported the 
validity of the hypothesized factor structure and in one case 
conclusively rejected the competing models proposed by 
Sipps et al. (1985) and Comrey (1983). Although additional 
confirmatory studies need to be conducted to demonstrate 
the generalizability of the above findings, there is no ques- 
tion that the results of the factor analytic studies reported 
over the past 10-year period have been very supportive of 
the validity of the four-scale structure of the MBTI. 


Correlation of MBTI Continuous Scores 
with Other Scales 


A series of tables in this section summarize representative 
correlations from many different samples with a wide vari- 
ety of instruments. One set of tables shows correlations 
based on Form G, while the other set is bascd on Form M. 
Many additional correlations for Form G are found in the 
1985 MBTI Manual (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). Some of 
the Form G correlations found in the 1985 MBTI Manual 
are repeated here because of their relevance to the construct 
validity of the preference scales. Correlations with Form G 
that were not available for the 1985 Manual are presented 
here for the same reason. 

In all of these tables, the left-hand columns show the 
actual product moment correlations of MBTI continuous 
scores with scales of other tests. Those tables that display 
Form G correlations use the continuous scores based on 
placing preference scores on a continuum, as described in 
the 1985 Manual. Those tables that display Form M correla- 
tions use theta as the MBTI score. (See Chapter 7 for a defi- 
nition of theta.) 

To make it easier to identify correlates of each prefer- 
ence, the right-hand column in each table designates the 
letters for preferences where correlations are at least .20 and 
significant at probabilities of .05 or greater. The .20 cutoff is 
used simply as a convention, so that by scanning the right- 
hand columns the reader can quickly identify characteris- 
tics associated with each preference and can judge whether 
these charactcristics make sense in light of the expectations 
of the theory. This has bcen carried over from the 1985 
Manual fot the sake of consistency. However, the use of this 
convention means that there arc statistically significant cor- 
relations shown in the main body of the table that are not 


174 Research 


flagged in the right-hand column because they were «.20. 
Although small, trends in such correlations may be theoret- 
ically as well as statistically significant, and readers are 
urged to seek these out. For theoretical purposes the direc- 
tion and trend of the correlations for a given preference 
scale across a variety of scales and samples is more impor- 
tant than the significance or absolute level of one correla- 
tion coefficient in one sample for one scale. 

Note that a correlation of at least .20 indicates that at 
least +% of the variance is shared among the two variables 
being correlated. While this may seem like a small portion 
of variance to those accustomed to evaluating reliability 
coefficients, it should be noted that these correlations are 
validity coefficients, which in the behavioral sciences are 
typically much lower. According to Cohen (1988), correla- 
tions between variables in personality and social psychol- 
ogy are considered large if they are about r = .5, which 
accounts for only 2596 of the shared variance. Correlations 
of .20 are considered small- to medium-sized effects (Cohen, 
1988), which are quite common and meaningful. 

Note also that the correlations reported in this chapter 
are raw (uncorrected) coefficients that may underestimate 
the true relationship between the latent variables. None of 
these correlations has been corrected for attenuation or 
restriction of range. Coefficients that are corrected for 
attenuation will be higher because the correction takes into 
account the less than perfect reliability of the two measures 
involved. Most of the reliability coefficients for the prefer- 
ence scales on Form M are in the .90 range (see Chapter 8) 
and thus require little correction. Many of the reliability 
coefficients of the other variables that are displayed in the 
tables in this chapter are unknown. Given that many of 
these scales were created only for research purposes or have 
not been subjected to extensive development, however, it is 
safe to say that their reliabilities are lower. If these reliabili- 
ties were around .60, then the corrected r = .20 correlations 
would be around r = .27. Similarly, if the samples used to 
compute the correlations were restricted in range (i.e., they 
were relatively homogeneous on the MBTI scale or the 
other scale), this would also result in lower correlations. 

Another point to consider when examining these tables: 
For the purposes of the theory it is just as important that cer- 
tain correlations are not significant as that other correlations 
are in the expected directions. For example, Extraversion 
should be positively correlated with measures of sociability; 
Thinking should not. The flagged correlation then may not 
be the most important one for a given hypothesis. For some 
investigations, overall patterns (both size and direction) 
may he important, and some of these will be noted below. In 
addition, a lack of a correlation may be meaningful. 

The conventional notation for MBTI correlations, using 
MBTI continuous scores or thetas, is followed, such that 
positive correlations are associated with I, N, E or P, and 
negative correlations with E, S, T, or J. However, this con- 
vention does not apply to either Table 9.1 or Table 9.2 
because the rescarchers who conducted these studies used 


MBTI preference scores, not continuous scores. In these 
tables positive correlations are associated with higher scores 
on the preference at the top of each column. 

Correlations of MBTI continuous scores have their limi- 
tations as evidence for construct validity. They report only 
the four preference scales one at a time and do not show the 
16 types as dynamic entities. Correlations also have the 
problem of confounding direction and clarity of preference. 

Unless otherwise noted, high scores in the scales reflect 
the concept named by the author of the scale. For example, 
if a scale named “Spontaneity” correlates with Perceiving, 
high scores for spontaneity would be associated with high 
scores on J-P and there would be a “P” in the right-hand col- 
umn. Not mentioned in the table but implicit in correlations 
is the fact that when high spontaneity is associated with Per- 
ceiving, low spontaneity is associated with Judging, since 
J-P is a bipolar scale. Similarly, when a scale is highly associ- 
ated with Judging, there will be a negative correlation in the 
J-P column and a “)” in the right-hand column. 

Corrclations of various instruments thought to be rele- 
vant to establishing the validitiy of the MBTI preference 
scales are found in the tables in this chapter. Tables 9.1 
through 9.6 display correlations of the MBTI with other 
personality instruments. 

Table 9.7 shows correlations of the Form M preferences 
with the General Occupational Themes, the Basic Interest 
Scates, and the Personal Style Scales of the Strong Interest 
Inventory. The Occupational Scales (OS) are not shown here 
for space reasons. However, for correlations of Form G with 
the OS see Hammer and Kummerow (1996). Table 9.8 
shows correlations with two additional career-related 
inventories, the Career Factors Inventory (Chartrand, Rob- 
bins, &amp; Morrill, 1997) and the Strong Shills Confidence 
Inventory (Betz, Borgen, &amp; Harmon, 1996). 

Table 9.9 shows correlations between MBTI continuous 
scores and scales from two inventories that measure values. 
Table 9.10 shows correlations of real and ideal work environ- 
ments based on the Work Environment Scale. Table 9.11 
shows correlations with three measures of stress and coping: 
the Maslach Burnout Inventory, the Coping Resources Inven- 
tory, and the State-Trait Anxicty Inventory. 


Extraversion In type theory, Extraversion is an outward 
attitude in which energy flows toward the environment. 
Ihis outward turning is manifested in different ways, 
including the following: 


B Extraversion as measured by other instruments: the 16 
Personality Factors? Questionnaire (16PF®), Millon Index 
of Personality Styles", NEO-PI, and Jungian Type Survey 

B Sense of comfort in the environment, which is shown in 
measures named selt-acceptance, well-being, autonomy, 
self-confidence, and stability 

B Action on the environment, as shown in correlations with 
dominance, assertiveness, social boldness, capacity for 
status, leadership, change, aggression, and exhibition 





Validity — 175 
Table 9.1 Correlation of MBT! Form G Preference Scores and the 
16 Personality Factors Questionnaire, Fifth Edition 
E I * S N T F J P 
Primary Factors 
Warmth .Al* ~.36* —. 06 —.03 —32* .24* -.15 -.03 
Reasoning —.09 .08 -.18 2 10 —.12 —.03 02 
Emotional Stability 565 —23* —-.12 .09 .09 -.09 —. t0 01 
Dominance Sl —.23* ~.22 29 21 —20 Ol .04 
Liveliness .48* ~51* —.06 —.06 —.03 .09 —.22 let 
Rule Consciousness -.17 Te .20 —20 -.0| Ol ry dol = 377 
Social Boldness 65* —52* —.l6 19 HI ~.08 -.09 06 
Sensitivity —. 10 13 —.17 GRI —.19 28 .18 -.13 
Vigilance —.22 13 .05 —.16 .20 —.12 2. -.03 
Abstractedness —.I5 .06 —.41* 41* —.04 .08 —25* Ble 
Privateness —.40* EE 18 -.14 27% ~,23* 49 —18 
Apprehension —.32* 193 04 .00 —.33* 7t 18 -.09 
Openness 
to Change 06 -.19 —59t .54* —.07 .00 —29* 2| 
Self-Reliance —.49* .42* .06 —.03 .08 —.08 .20 .06 
Perfectionism —0I .02 2255 —.23* alle) —.1 | 5A —53* 
Tension -.12 .08 —.12 03 als -.03 01 10 
Global Factors 
Extraversion .68* = 017 —. l6 .08 — I8 Ale —26* .09 
Anxiety -.38* 23 .04 -.08 -.05 09 lS -.01 
Tough-Mindedness —03 .08 5555 —.56* .24* ~.26* 2 —.12 
Independence a7” —,35* —.36* 2 22 —19 -.09 JM 
Self-Control —.13 47 .38* 1357 .08 —.10 .54* ~.57* 


Note: N = 119, *p &lt; .0 


pe p01! 


Source: From 16PF Fifth Edition Administrators Guide (p. 87), by M. Russell and D. Karol, 1994, Champaign. IL Institute for Personality and Ability Testing. Inc. Copyright 1994 


by Insutute for Personality and Ability Testing, Inc Used with permission. 


B Sociability and relatedness to others, in scales such as out- 
going, sociability, social presence, inclusion, affection, 
warmth, social interaction, social relations, valuing of 
community, empathy, high interpersonal needs (FIRO 
Total Needs), and peer cohesion 

B Responsiveness to the environment, shown in measures 
such as liveliness and free child 

B Ways of coping by the use of social and emotional 
resources 

B Career interests that relate to general social and enterpris- 
ing interests and public speaking 


Introversion Introversion in type theory is a neutral term, 
referring to an inward-turning attitude, one more 
concerned with inner than outer realities. Unfortunately, in 
other personality measures Introversion is often associated 
with scale names that have a negative connotation. To some 


extent Introverts can be expected to report some anxiety or 
shyness. In the Introverted attitude the cause of events is 
sought within the person. In theory Introverts should be 
less at home in the environment than Extraverts. Some few 
measures, however, will express the positive qualities of 
Introverts, such as self-sufficiency on the 16PE In their 
career choices, Introverts often select occupations that 
require sustained attention and interest in concepts and 
ideas. Constructs related to Introversion include the 
following: 


B Introversion as measured by other instruments: Millon 
Index of Personality Styles, Jungian Type Survey, and the 
internality scale from the California Psychological Inven- 
Lory. 

B Lack of comfort with the environment in measures such as 
anxiety, hesitating, retiring, abasement, deference, yield- 
ing, and accommodating 


176 








Research 
Table 9.2 Correlation of MBTI Form G Preference Scores 
and the Millon Index of Personolity Styles 
E | S N T F J P 
Enhancing 40 —.45 -.47 ale -.02 -.06 .08 —.07 
Preserving —43 46 iE —.10 06 .00 —.07 .06 
Modifying .43 —.47 —.34 vi 18 —.24 .08 -.07 
Accommodating —.4| ay 34 —2 | —.16 24 -.17 16 
Individuating .07 —.04 —.06 10 .45 —.36 —.13 18 
Nurturing .07 -.13 —.06 .03 —.47 .46 .I4 -.|4 
Extraverting .67 -.7 | 2.39 .26 EIS .04 .06 —.06 
Introverting -.63 64 .24 —12 Jl —.06 LL 12 
Sensing —18 17 45 -.75 10 —.10 24 —25 
Intuiting .08 —.09 -.60 .60 —20 23 —24 75 
Thinking —.05 —-.01 18 —15 62 -.57 .05 —.02 
Feeling —-.03 -.01 —.2| Zi -.62 .64 .00 .00 
Systematizing Je: —.48 —.09 .00 —05 —.05 59 -.60 
Innovating 27 —.29 —.44 as .07 -.01 -.5l 55 
Retiring —.59 .56 .24 —.13 3 -.07 —.07 ZO 
Outgoing .65 —.65 —39 29 .04 — l6 —.02 .03 
Hesitating ~55 .60 18 —.10 .07 .04 —.06 .06 
Asserting —46 —.52 —25 317 .26 —35 .05 —-.03 
Dissenting —.I | als 03 .06 26 —.15 —.39 44 
Conforming .03 ~.10 .30 —.36 .00 -.06 pn = 
Yielding —.46 47 2l —.12 —.0l d6 — l 13 
Controlling .30 —.30 -.03 .03 .49 —49 ~14 AS 
Complaining —.20 .24 aS —.08 25 —. l6 —.26 .28 
Agreeing —22 202 .09 —.I l sate Ed 57 Vi -.29 
Positive Impression —.07 —.03 01 .08 -.05 d3 23 —.l6 
Negative Impression —.27 .28 .09 —.02 .05 -.01 —|5 16 


Note: Bold indicates scales measuring similar constructs; correlations greater than? = .25 are significant at p &lt; (O1, one-tailed 


Source From Millon Index of Personality Styles Manual (p. 75), hy T. Millon, 1994, San Antonio, TX. The Psychological Corporation Copyright 1994 by Dicandrien, Inc. 


Used with permission 


m Need to control external stimulation in scales such as pri- 
vateness and preserving 

m Independence from the environment in measures such as 
self-reliance and self-control 

m lendency to be stressed by environmental demands as evi- 
denced by correlations with burnout scales such as emo- 
tional exhaustion and depersonalization 

B Career interests in the investigative and scientific areas 


Sensing Perception Sensing perception is perception by 
way of the senses and therefore is concerned with awareness 
ol present realities. Characteristics expected to follow from 
Sensing perception are realism, common sense, practicality, 
conservatism, preference for the concrete rather than the 
abstract, and pleasure in the current moment. Sensing is 
rclated to the following: 


B Sensing as measured by other instruments: Jungian Type 
Survey and Millon Index of Personality Styles 


m Taking a practical approach such as in correlations with 
tough-mindedness 

m Managing reality as demonstrated by correlations with 
scales such as control and order 

g Accepting reality, as seen in relationships with measures 
of rule consciousness, accommodating, retiring, sclf- 
control, conforming, vielding, socialization, endurance, 
achievement via conformity, norm-favoring, deference 
and a valuing of home activities, economic security, and 
physical comfort 

m Career interests include conventional, athletics, mathe- 
matics, law/politics, organizational management, data 
management, and office services 


Intuitive Perception Intuition is the perception of 
possibilities, patterns, symbols, and abstractions. Intuition 
leads to interest in fields where much of the work is at a 
symbolic, theoretical, or abstract level, or where it is forging 


Validity — 177 


—— ee ———— 
r — 


Table 9.3 Correlation of MBTI Form G Continuous Scores and 
the California Psychological Inventory, Form 434 


Gender E-I S-N T-F J-P Summary 
Dominance M —.50 02 —.20 -.15 E-T- 
F —53 .04 -17 -.10 E— 
Capacity for Status M —A2 23 -.04 .04 EN— 
E —. 43 .24 —.02 03 EN— 
Sociability M -.63 02 —.12 —.02 E— 
F —.70 07 -.02 .00 E— 
Social Presence M —, 46 18 —.14 9 E—— 
E —57 15 01 A3 E— 
Self-Acceptance M —5| 3 —.I5 .03 E—— 
E —.58 als —.08 .03 E— 
Independence M —27 25 —.23 07 ENT- 
F —.30 .26 —.17 .09 EN— 
Empathy M —.36 .à4 .09 PH EN— 
E —56 23 .05 23 EN-P 
Responsibility M —.05 01 .00 —32 —] 
F -.05 2i — 04 -.|4 — 
Socialization M —.06 —.20 —.05 —33 -5-] 
F —.08 —.20 Ol —.29 -$-] 
Self-Control M 12 —07 —.03 —,3l —] 
E .18 —.12 .00 —24 — | 
Good Impression M —15 —06 109 —.34 —] 
F —.07 ~.14 06 —25 —] 
Communality M = 1 —.İ l -.08 -23 —] 
F —.22 —. l6 -.0| —.2 | E—J 
Well-Being M —.2 | —.0| —. 18 —19 E— 
F —.20 .02 —.09 zu E— 
Tolerance M 04 v .09 —. 0I -N— 
F — 07 18 .04 .02 —— 
Achievement via Conformity M -.17 -.10 —.13 —.44 —T1 
F —.14 —.20 —.08 —.44 —S- 
Achievement via Independence M 01 ol -.10 .04 -N— 
F -.13 99 -.13 .03 -N— 
Intellectual Efficiency M —17 .20 c9 203 -N— 
F —29 D —.09 .04 EN— 
Psychological-Mindedness M —.03 .30 —15 .08 -N— 
F —.0| Sil —15 .05 -N— 
Flexibility M .03 2 A 55 —N-P 
E —.15 .43 07 S -N-P 
Femininity/Masculinity M .20 .09 BE .02 I-F- 
F 14 Ol 18 —,06 —— 
Internality M r —. 06 .l6 — 02 I— 
F .54 —. 06 I3 — 04 I— 
Norm-Favoring M —24 —.30 -.12 —54 ES-J 
F —.12 —.29 —.07 —. 45 -S-J 
Self-Realization M —. 09 27 .00 .02 -N— 
F ~.18 .24 .04 04 -N— 
Managerial Potential M —.32 08 —.13 —2l E—) 
F —.33 .08 LO -.15 E—- 
Work Orientation M —.05 —. 08 -45 -.27 -—) 
F —. 08 .00 —.04 ~.14 —- 
Creativity M —. 06 D3 .09 2 -N-P 
F -.28 :53 .00 .43 EN-P 
Leadership Potential M —. 43 -.01 —.23 —.28 E-T) 
F —.47 01 —.15 —.2| E—| 


SS a ee ee eee ee 


Note: N = 695; 401 males, 292 females; significance levels not reported; summary shows all r 2 .20. 


Source From CPI Manual (p. 218), by H Gough and P Bradley, 1996, Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press Copyright 1996 hy Consulting Psychologists Press 
Used with permission. 


18 Research 


E —": 











: : . he gio ud 
able 9.4 Correlation of MBTI Form G Continuous Scores and the NEO-PI of 
MR . $ Gender E-} S-N T-F J-P Summary 

Neuroticism M A ss —.06 .06 AI —— 

F AE Ol 287 .04 —F- 
Extraversion M -—T4*** 10 debes Al eo E— 

E -.69***' 22e 10 20 EN-P 
Openness 4 M .03 T .02 30 -N-P 

F —.03 9*3 —.02 26 -N-P 
Agreeableness M —-.03 .04 A4 —.06 —F- 

B —.08 03 46*** .05 —F- 
Conscientiousness M .08 -—15 rales —. 4 Grr —] 

F .08 -.10 —22"** -.46*** —T] 








Note: N = 468; 267 males, 201 females; *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01, ***p &lt; .001. Bold indicates scales measuring similar constructs. 





Source. From “Reinterpreting the Myers-Briggs Iype Indicator from the Perspective of the Five-Factor Model of Personality,” by R. R. McCrae and P T Costa, 1989, 
Journal of Personality, 57, p. 30. Copyright 1989 hy Blackwell Publishers. Used with permission. 


Table 9.5 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and the FIRO-B 


E-I S-N 
Expressed Inclusion =a xd rss 
Wanted Inclusion —36*** AE 
Expressed Control 2.235EE 2 aa 
Wanted Control 07° 93" 
Expressed Affection — 47 pass 
Wanted Affection 21325 ‘0755 
Total Inclusion —48*** JE 
Total Control —, | 478 .03 
Total Affection —.44 NOSE 
Total Expressed —55*e* [e 
Total Wanted -.32*"* Deg 
Total Needs i —49*** 12 lee 





T-F J-P Summary 
EE Ol E— 
MI .04* E-— 
—20*e* .00 E-T- 
v pes oS —F- 
Dor .00 E-F- 
DE .00 E-F- 
css 02 E—— 
—.0] .04* — 
oe .00 E-F- 
10 y fumare Ol [— 
P i Ol E-F- 
ORE .00 E-F- 


Note: n = 2,996; *p &lt; 05, **p &lt; 01, ^**p« 001. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


ground in new areas. Construets related to Intuition include 
the following: 


Intuition as measured by other instruments: Jungian Type 
Survey and Millon Index of Personality Styles 

Openness to the environment as demonstrated by correla- 
tions with variables such as modifying, sensitivity, open- 
ness to change, change, openness, risk taking, flexibility, 
and variety 

Thinking abstractly in relationships with measures of rea- 
soning, abstractedness, and intellectual efficiency and in 
valuing studying and an academic learning environment 
Independence as seen in correlations with scales measuring 
achievement via independence, free child, and autonomy 

Career interests in artistic areas such as music/dramatics, 
art, applied arts, and writing 


Thinking Judgment In theory, Thinking should be associated 
with analytical, logical, skeptical approaches to problems and 
to a coolness or distance in interpersonal relationships. 
Occupations attractive to Thinking types should be those 
requiring work with material or concepts that are best 
understood analytically or from a cause-effeet framework. 
Construets related to Thinking include the following: 


Thinking as measured by other instruments: Jungian Type 
Survey and Millon Index of Personality Styles 

Behaviors flowing from logical analysis as demonstrated 
by correlations with scales such as asserting, dissenting, 
complaining, tough-mindedness, expressed control, 
controlling, and order 

Behaviors related to thinking and acting independently as in 
relationships with measures of independence, autonomy, 


| a a uty , ^ diu, 
EN P ug : ift, d Validity — 179 
/ sw ; 4 
Table 9.6 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and the Adjective Check List 
E-I (0 $-N AITF J-P Summary 
Achievement — 20 a £06; QU 30% —.[3* 5 PS E-T- 
Dominance -36* t s =e ol €^ Ee ie 
Endurance 03 —20*"* —34** —28** -ST]J 
Order .06 -.24** -—37** —,34** -STJ 
Intraception —.09 .06 Ol —.04 —-— 
Nurturance —24** .07 32 .06 E-F- 
Affiliation —37** 10 wae 14* E— 
Heterosexuality —5|** A Vos IFz E-F- 
Exhibition —.60** 20 —.04 de EN-P 
Autonomy —24** 49:55 —28*"* ee E-T- 
Aggression —28** .04 —24** .04 E-T- 
Change -.39** 30 ru da 6 EN-P 
Succorance .04 .04 em —.00 —F- 
Abasement zi —.03 13955 —.08 I-F- 
Deference 262m -.|9** 24% —.21** I-F] 
Counseling Readiness ,I 9:6 —.00 14% —,|3* —— 
Self-Control 44 —.24** 02 2975 IS 
Self-Confidence Taga 02 —.15* 06 == 
Personal Adjustment —,2 DRE —.06 06 Ol E—— 
Ideal Self —24"* 10 —18** .03 E— 
Creative Personality —.30** 225 —.07 aa EN-P 
Military Leadership Ol —. | 4* -22** —.1 I —T- 
Masculine Attributes —27** 05 —, 2555 10 E-T- 
Feminine Attributes —23** Ail ole .08 E-F- 
Critical Parent ~.12 .06 —24** .00 —T- 
Nurturing Parent -47** -.43* .03 —.1 1 —- 
Adult 0l —.16* -35** —.|5* —T- 
Free Child —.60°* oe .04 dt^ EN-P 
Adapted Child .44* 10 2e .08 —F- 
Welsh A-I scale —.36** 2895s ul 9259 v2 ind E—P 
Welsh A-2 scale —.10 So .08 mo" -N-P 
Welsh A-3 scale —30** .05 E ai 10 E-F- 
Welsh A-4 scale —07 .03 —22** —.08 —T- 





Note: n = 247, *p &lt; 05, **p&lt; OL. See Appendix lor a description of the sample. 


Source Jowa State University. 


achievement, endurance, risk taking, adult, and valuing skeptical approach in making decisions. Correlations 
work include the following: 
B Career interests in the realistic and investigative areas and 


l l Bor l i l m Fecling as measured by other instruments: Jungian Type 
in mechanical activities, science, mathematics, law/poli- | 


Survey and Millon Index of Personality Styles 
m Concern for others as demonstrated by correlations with 
measures of nurturing, warmth, alfection, and succorance 
Feeling Judgment Feeling judgments are judgments made m Adaptability to others as shown in variables like accom- 
on the basis of subjective values rather than analysis or | 


tics, and data management 


modating, agreeing, agrceableness, sensitivity, abase- 


logie. Feeling is predicted to be associated with charac- ment, deference, and desire for peer cohesion 
teristics reflecting care or concern for people; interpersonal — g (reci interests in the social and artistic areas and in 
warmth; communieation through the spoken word, the activiues such as music/dramatics, art, culinary arts, 


180 . Research "E d 


—— — +474 
Table 9.7 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and / 
the Strong Interest Inventory in Two Samples of College Students 
Strong Interest Inventory E-I S-N T-F J-P Summary 
General Occupational Themes J 
Realistic .08 .01 —.15* 20 —P 
-.0S —.06 -4]** ls —T- 
Investigative J .00 —.l6* —.08 
—.10 -.10 —32** —.06 —T- 
Artistic .04 Eu 2265: 22555 —NFP 
—.03 4255 an .04 -N— 
Social -—26** 167 34 H7 E-F- 
— 24 —.17* 24 —.18* E-F- 
Enterprising —28** —.05 .03 01 E— 
—.13 —2258 —.08 -.10 -5 
Conventional —.03 315 =l] —20** -$-] 
—.08 —37** —.09 —2 |* -S-J 
Basic Interest Scales 
Agriculture —.03 -.07 -.05 2L Oi — 
—.14 —.03 =l} 13 — 
Nature .08 25s .06 :225* ——P 
—.06 .12 —.09 .06 — 
Military Activities 01 .05 225 .04 —T- 
—03 —0l -20** al —T- 
Athletics —.|3* —.16* —.|4* —.0| --— 
—.18* i -27** .02 -ST- 
Mechanical Activities .08 —.0| —.18** 14% o 
—.05 —.09 -—43** .08 —T- 
Science 1E: 05 —20** —.07 —T- 
—.05 .03 A .02 —T- 
Mathematics .04 =L 2 ins —.|5* -ST- 
~.09 =o = 29 -.14 -ST- 
Medical Science .07 .02 —.02 —.03 —— 
—.1S* —.13 —26** —.06 —T- 
Music/Dramatics ' —.02 4a" ole P iii -NFP 
—.06 So 3 AN -N— 
Art ~ 07 4g** 249 229 -NFP 
S^ 00 4|** 07 01 -N— 
Applied Arts Y — 0 48** 16% 26** -N-P 
VY «x 02 34** —06 —.0] -N— 
Writing E b 08 469 ia 24% -N-P 
: .  =.06 43** A7# 00 -NS 
Culinary Arts S S i6 A 28° 06 + 
m —28** .00 14 —.09 E—- 
Teaching x M -27% 9 21 309 E-FP 
N 5 —. | 7* —.04 14 -. 15*j = 
Social Service d —.25** Pes 36°" \ Js* ENF- 
7 ~.17* —.04 DOS wm ll —F- 
Medical Service, * + - —.03 .09 .16* Y .07 -—- 
M. uf -S* —.18* —.07 T -—| —-— 
Religious Activities ^5 04 AS* 1g ^ 08 — 
Sy v = AS* D yh EOP ay —15* a, — . 
Public Speaking , x Lcd 249 I my “i MU EN— 
"14 —.06 TIA- ' —.06 Lars ; 
Law/Politics ~.16% 13 -25" —04 LE 


( zi -—.18* E25 —.04 —T- 





e i. Validity — 181 





| vA ON) 
Table 9.7 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and 
the Strong Interest Inventory in Two Samples of College Students continued 





Strong Interest Inventory E-I S-N T-F J-P Summary 


Bosic Interest Scoles (continued) 


Merchandising —.24** —.05 105 .00 E— 
—.09 —. 1 97* —.0l —. 1] -— — 
Sales —29** —.10 —0| Ol E— 
—.09 —.28** —.12 —.04 -$— 
Organizational Management —28** —.14* "T —.09 —09 E— 
—.16* —32 7 —07 —.1 1 -s— 
Data Management —.00 clan '-. 2g l25** -5T) yi 
—07 ' |—43** A 224 = 237% -5T]J 
Computer Activities .02 —.12 E Tae Endo ——- 
—.05 —.16* —.14 .00 E, —— 
Office Services —.03 = 297% —0| —|8* v» -Sg— 
—07 —33** 03 —20* MA DM" — 
MÀ À—À—MÀ——— M a , | ABC MM ur. GT 
Personol Style Scoles s po 
Work Style —46** 07 Eria 10 Co: E-F- 
—.26** —.|5* AQ** -.|4 E-F- 
Learning Environment —07 AT —07 E -N— 
—11 42** —.03 04 -N— 
Leadership Style =50" oS —.04 R5* EN— 
—45** .06 —.04 04 E— 
Risk Taking/Adventure —.15* "A aa =Í a —N-P 
—2|** 4c zs Sle ENTP 





Note: For each scale, top row n = 245 and bottom row n = 197; *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01 See Appendix for a description of the samples. 


Source: For each scale, top row from lowa State University and bottom row from Middle Tennessee State University 


Table 9.8 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores with the 
Skills Confidence Inventory and the Career Factors Inventory 


E-I S-N T-F J-P Summary 
Skills Confidence Inventory 
Realistic —.06 H2 —.02 TJ ——P 
Investigative .04 ES —23** .02 —T- 
Artistic —.02 d pes Mott -N-P 
Social —34** Oe 205s 1/5595 E-F- 
Enterprising —37** all —20** Tg E-T- 
Conventional —0I —20** —.26** —.I -ST- 
Career Foctors Inventory 
Career Information —.07 —.09 01 -.13 U— 
Self-Knowledge 07 —.05 .09 —.20** —] 
Career Choice Anxiety 20 ~1] .08 —.13 I—- 
Indecisiveness p —.09 24 03 I-F- 


= “he ake 


Note: Skills Confidence Inventory n = 245, Career Factors Inventory n = 197; *p &lt; 05, **p &lt; O1. See Appendix for a description of the samples 


Source: Skills Confidence Inventory from iowa State University and Career Factors Inventory trom Middle Tennessee State University 


182 Research 


Table 9.9 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and 
the Salience Inventory and the Values Scale 


E-I S-N T-F J-P Summary 
Salience Inventory 
Participation 
Study —.17 E as .05 v -N— 
Work —.19 H2 -.19 —.15 — 
Community —.407* .20 01 .00 E— 
Home —.2 | —.28* .12 —.10 S— 
Leisure =. l -32** -.05 —.06 -S— 
Commitment 
Study —.İ I 13655. —.07 12 -N— 
Work —.05 10 —.25* —.02 —T- 
Community —4]** aus —.03 .08 EN— 
Home —28* —.12 3 .00 E— 
Leisure —.24 ~.27* —.05 —.05 S— 
Value Expectations 
Study —.25* 40** —.08 cay EN-P 
Work —.2 | a —.19 .l6 — 
Community 3918 ae —.04 .07 EN— 
Home —36** —.05 .18 15 E— 


Leisure —,30* —.| | .05 9 E— 


Values Scale 


Ability Utilization —.08 Dac —.26** —.0I -NT- 
Achievement -.09 05 —12 -.18 — 
Advancement 04 —.08 .03 —07 -— 
Aesthetics —.08 26°" 20° .00 -NF- 
Altruism -.17 pee .08 .03 -N— 
Authority 255 14 =e .02 E-T- 
Autonomy .05 3428 -.13 :29F* -N-P 
Creativity -.1] 220 —.20* 14 -NT- 
Economic Rewards .18 —.09 SH —.09 —— 
Lifestyle 10 .24* —.12 .24* —N-P 
Personal Development .03 oo ~.05 07 -N— 
Physical Activity —.08 -.03 1z aM — 
Prestige —.03 .02 —.l6 —25** —| 
Risk —.12 EN -2]* Xs -NTP 
Social Interaction —43** 14 .00 —.05 E— 
Social Relations 1297. —.06 all —.17 E— 
Variety -—|! Ee .04 USE —N-P 
Working Conditions 06 -.13 Aes —.17 -——— 
Cultural Identity 112 ~.03 .03 -.14 —— 
Physical Prowess .03 .02 Ol 10 —— 
Economic Security Z -33** 2.27 x d ISF) 


Note: Salience Inventory n = 67, Values Scale n = 110; *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; 01 See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source. Fairview Health Services 


Validity 183 








Table 9.10 Correlation of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and 
the Work Environment Scale 
E-I S-N T-F J-P Summary 
Ideal 
Involvement —20 —0I 227 -.03 —F- 
Peer Cohesion —3l** 217 37 2 E-F- 
Supervisor Support —27* .l6 10 —02 E— 
Autonomy 3M Al Am .02 —— 
Task Orientation —21* Ol Ad —11 E— 
Work Pressure 7 -.10 —07 —47 — 
Clarity —.I5 —14 .20 —.17 — 
Control —.12 —4I** -.10 -.35** -S-J 
Innovation —14 2335 AT .07 -N— 
Physical Comfort —.16 .04 an .08 —— 
Real 
Involvement —22* —0I —01 .01 E— 
Peer Cohesion —21* —.08 —.07 .00 E— 
Supervisor Support —.13 —13 —.04 .04 —— 
Autonomy —22* —.19 -.13 —.08 E— 
Task Orientation —28** 1 .03 .06 E— 
Work Pressure Ol 215 .02 an —N— 
Clarity —.16 —.13 04 .02 —— 
Control .04 -.03 0 ~.22* —-| 
Innovation —24* .00 —.09 ~.06 E-— 
Physical Comfort -28" Jo —.23* —.17 EST- 


ee AGENCE MCCC NEN. St X C en Ee ee 08] 0287 773-0 eae ee Se eS eo 
Note’ n = 97; *p &lt; .05, **p &lt; .01. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: Employee Career Enrichment Program, University of Minnesota 


The Judging Attitude The J-P dichotomy is concerned 
with when à person feels comfortable concluding that 
evidence is sufficient and a decision can be made. In the 
Judging attitude a decision is made relatively quickly; in the 
Perceiving attitude perception continues longer, options are 
kept open, and adaptability to a changing situation is pre- 
ferred over following a goal-directed plan. 

In theory, characteristics associated with a preference for 
the Judging attitude are decisiveness, desire for control, 
order, dependability, and conscientiousness. When Judging 
is not balanced adequately by Perceiving, Judging may be 
correlated with prejudice or closed-mindedness. Correla- 
tions include the following: 


B Attempt to create order in the environment as shown in cor- 
relations with scales such as systematizing, perfection- 
ism, and control 

W Respect for societal mores as shown in relationships with 
scales such as order, conforming, rule consciousness, 
conscientiousness, responsibility, socialization, good 


impression, self-control, endurance, achievement via 
conformity, and valuing economic security 

B Career interests in the conventional area and in data 
management and office services activities 


The Perceiving Attitude Type theory predicts that the 
Perceiving attitude will be associated with spontaneity, 
adaptability, curiosity, and openness to new ideas. If not 
balanced by Judging, Perceiving may be correlated with 
undependability. Constructs related to Perceiving include 
the following: 


8 Openness to the environment, as shown by relationships 
with measures of innovation (the opposite of systematiz- 
ing on the Millon Index of Personality Styles), openness to 
change, abstractedness, openness, flexibility, variety, cre- 
ativity, change, free child, autonomy, risk taking, and 
valuing studying 

B Career interests in the artistic area and interest in activi- 
ties related to nature, music/dramatics, art, applied arts, 
and writing 


184 . Research 





Table 9.1! 


Correlations of MBTI Form M Continuous Scores and the Maslach Burnout 


Inventory, the Coping Resources Inventory, and the State- Trait Anxiety Inventory g 


E-I S-N 


Maslach Burnout Inventory 


Emotional Exhaustion 34 —.10 
Depersonalization Ei —.17 
Personal Accomplishment —,25* 04 
Coping Resources Inventory 

Cognitive —34** 09 
Social —68** |] 
Emotional —4|** 08 
Spiritual/Philosophical ss 16 
Physical —.02 22 
Total —.48* l6 
State- Trait Anxiety Inventory 

State 325 -.10 
Trait Dou —.06 


T-F J-P Summary 








—04 —.09 = 
-.03 E = 
ol 04 E— 
-01 —03 E— 
47* 00 prm 
44 zb Ee 
43 02 E— 
—06 03 — 
42 00 pe 
A2 -.30* = 
-0I -24 ps 





Note: Maslach Burnout Inventory n = 84, Coping Resources Inventory n = 167, State- Trait Anxiety Inventory N = 60; *p &lt; 05, **p &lt; O1. See Appendix for a 
à ping : À i l l PP 


description of the samples. 


Source: Maslach Burnout Inventory from Fairview Health Services, Coping Resources Inventory [rom CRI sample, State-Tratt Anxiety Inventory from Spielberger (1983). 


Comparison of the MBTI 
and the Jungian Type Survey 


The correlations between the MBTI and the Jungian Type 
Survey CJ TS), or Gray-Wheelwright (Wheelwright, Wheel- 
wright, &amp; Buehler, 1964), are of special interest to the con- 
struct validity of the MBTI because the JTS was developed 
by two Jungian analysts independently of the MBTI, also 
with the purpose of identifying Jungian types. Corrclations 
from three different studies are shown in Table 9.12. The 
sample at the top of the table (Karesh, Pieper, &amp; Holland, 
1994) correlated JTS preference scores with MBTI Form G 
continuous scores. The two samples at the bottom of the 
table are from the 1985 MBTI Manual. The JTS has no scale 
comparable to J-P. 

Despite the relatively positive correlations for the prefer- 
ences individually, Grant (1965) reported that only 2196 of 
159 Auburn University students came out the same type on 
both instruments. Rich (1972) also compared thc MBTI 
and the 15th edition of the JTS on a sample of 98 evening 
division students in a course on Jung offered at the Univer- 
sity of Minnesota. Continuous scores were not used for the 
analyses; instead, correlations were reported for the sums of 
MBII points and the JTS scores. The correlations between 
the two instruments were E .68 (p &lt; .01), 1.66 (p &lt; .01), S 
3 (p= 01), N A17 p. « 015. T 3395 ROP and PE 
05). The two instruments appear to be tapping the same 
constructs. 


Evidence for Dichotomies 


Jungian theory posits the existence of dichotomies. A 
promising technique for showing evidence of dichotomies 
is to plot the means of a dependent variable upon both 
poles of a preference scale. A dichotomy should show a 
division point where there is a change in slope or level, or 
some other disparity, between the two poles of the scale. If 
possible, the dependent variable should be onc in which the 
two categories of people behave quite differently, even with 
the barest difference in their scores. It is not easy to identify 
variables relevant to a given scale that are also relatively free 
of variance from the other three scales. For example, “gre- 
gariousness" is obviously a better variable for testing differ- 
ences on the E-l scale than on the S-N or J-P scales. 

When a disparity can be found, it supports the hypothe- 
sis that the scale reflects a dichotomy—that two distinct 
categories of people, with opposite preferences, have been 
separated by MBTI scores. It is important to remember, 
however, that the disparity (and division point) will be 
clouded by any error variance in the MBTI scales. It is 
therelore necessary to examine disparities across a number 
of dependent variables. 

When plotting scores of a relevant variable on MBTI 
scores (which can be continuous scores, preference clarity 
indexes, or ranges of either type of score), a crucial question 
is whether the observed disparities in level and/or slope 
between the two halves of the distribution are consistent 


Table 9.12 Correlation of MBTI Continuous 
Scores (Form G) and the Jungian 
Type Survey in Two Samples 
JTS N E-1 S-N T-F 
E 192 —70 
| 192 69 
5 192 -42 —22 
N 192 42 2l 
T 192 03 -34 
F 192 -03 35 
E-I 47 79 
42 55 
S-N 47 58 
42 66 60 
T-F 47 66 
42 


Source: Top half of table from “Comparing the MBTI, Jungian Type Survey, and the 
Singer-Loomis Inventory of Personality.” by D. M. Karesh, W A Pieper, and C. L Hol- 
land, 1994, Journal of Psychological Type, 30, pp. 34-35. Copynght 1994 by Journal of 
Psychological Type. Used with permission. Bottom half of table from Manual: A Guide 
to the Development ond Use of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (p. 210), by l. B. Myers 
and M H McCaulley, 1985, Palo Alto, CA: Consulung Psychologists Press. Copy- 
nght 1985 by Consulung Psychologists Press. Used with permission. 


with the usual assumption of a continuum or are better 
explained by the hypothesis of two different populations. If 
the plots are found to show unusual characteristics that can 
best be explained as reflecting a dichotomy, then both the 
theory and the validity of the MBTI would be supported. 
The conditions for these analyses are as follows: 


I. The basic trend for cach half of the distribution should be 
clearly evident. The trend should be a function of the 
relationship between the MBTI preference and the 
other construct and not a function of the particular 
sample. Samples of several thousand can, of course, 
be more finely divided and still yield a stable picture 
of the distribution slope and level. This provides 
some insurance against chance variation due to sam- 
pling or measurement error. Also, stability is more 
essential than detail; it is more important to identify 
the overall stable trend in the data than to focus on 
how the preference scale should be divided. 

2. Any disparity between the halves should not be 
"smoothed." No a priori assumption of a continuum 
should be imposed on the data by connecting the two 
halves. Each half of the distribution should be 
allowed to start at zero as though the other did not 
exist. The trend of each half can then be determined 
independently. 

3. A reversal in direction is evidence for dichotomy. The 
clearest kind of disparity in slope is a reversal of 


Validity 185 


direction, for example, a V-shaped or U-shaped linc. 
According to the Jungian hypothesis, each distrihu- 
tion should divide the population into two categories. 
The slope of the line within each category should 
reflect the effect of differing clarities of preference. 
Because the two populations are hypothesized, there 
is no obligation to harmonize or connect the slopes or 
lines of the two categories. Between categories, there- 
fore, there can be disparity in any combination of 
slope, level, and direction. 


Examples of U-Shaped Distribution Plots A series of 
analyses were made of a sample of 5,025 male Pennsylvania 
high school students and a sample of 720 male Mas- 
sachusetts high school students. Each analysis contained 
six sample groups based on the size of the preference scores 
(1-17, 19-35, and 37+ on each side of the midpoint). In the 
Pennsylvania sample, mean IQ scores were computed for 
each preference score grouping; for the Massachusetts 
sample, vocabulary scores were used. 

Figure 9.1 shows the mean intelligence scores for the 
male Pennsylvania high school students, divided into six 
groups of the preference scores for each of the dichotomies, 
and the mean vocabulary scores for the Massachusetts high 
school students for the same six groupings for each of the 
four MBTI scales. 

Both the E-1 and J-P dichotomies show a trend for 
clearer preferences (away from the midpoint) to be associ- 
ated with higher scores. The Perceiving side of the scale is 
also higher than the Judging side of the scale, which is typi- 
cal for J-P plots on aptitude/achievement data. 

Clear preferences on either Thinking or Feeling are asso- 
ciated with higher scores on both IQ and vocabulary mea- 
sures. The curve shows greater discrepancy for clear and 
unclear (near the midpoint) preferences than the curves for 
E-I and J-P 

The plots for the S-N scale show that this scale does not 
operate the same on intelligence and vocabulary as do the 
other scales. Rather than clearer preferences in either pole 
leading to higher IQ and vocabulary scores, only clearer 
preferences for Intuition lead to greater scores. This also 
demonstrates why it is important to choose a variable for 
each scale that is theoretically appropriate. 


Examples of Discontinuities If Jung was correct about 
dichotomous populations, and if the MBTI correctly 
separates the two populations on each prelerence scale, then 
a discontinuity around the midpoint of the scale is expected. 
In order to constitute a discontinuity, there must be à 
significantly greater rate of change at the point of dis- 
continuity than on either side of that point. lt is not sufficient 
to show that the difference in means or proportions between 
all contiguous intervals is significant; what is important is 
evidence for a change in slope or direction somewhere near 
the hypothesized midpoint of the scale. 


156 


Mean IQ 


Mean IQ 


Mean IQ 


Mean IQ 


Research 

125 

120 

IIS 

110 r 

IOS 
36 18 O 18 36 
E Scores | Scores 

Ip o 

120 

115 

110 4 

10S 
36 18 0 18 36 
S Scores N Scores 

125 

120 

TE 

110 

105 . 
36 18 O0 18 36 
T Scores F Scores 


125 
120 
lS D m 
110 a 
105 
30 BLOGO OA 
J Scores P Scores 


Vocabulary 


Vocabulary 


Vocabulary 


Vocabulary 


19 
17 
I5 
13 
EN 
r — 
9 
36 8 30 I8 36 
E Scores | Scores 
19 
y 
I5 
13 
1 | GEN 
9 
36 fae) 0 187 36 
S Scores N Scores 
19 
17 
IS 
13 
ii 
9 
30g 0E 1 82545 
T Scores F Scores 
17 
IS 


; pes 


3G EINE 


J Scores 


I8 36 


P Scores 


Figure 9.1 Mean Aptitude Scores at Different Levels of Preference Scores for Each of the Dichotomies 
Note: Mean intelligence scores are for the male Pennsylvania high school students; mean vocabulary scores are for the Massachusetts high school students. 


Proportion of Engineers 


48 36 24 12 0 12 24 


T Scores 





Validity 187 


36 48 


F Scores 


Figure 9.2 Proportion of Engineering Students Who Reported Different Levels of Preference on the T-F Dichotomy 


One needs, therefore, evidence for a not-too-steep slope 
with a significant break at the division point. Because proba- 
bilities are influenced by the size of samples, to demonstrate 
that such a break is significant either the sample must be so 
large that even a modest discontinuity is significant or the 
discontinuity must be so large that it is significant even for a 
modest sample. Each of these alternatives is demonstrated. 


Engineering Students and the T-F Scale A comparison of 
liberal arts and engineering students on thc T—F scale is an 
example of a small difference observable in a large sample 
and is shown in Figure 9.2. One conspicuous contrast on 
the T-F scale is between a sample of 2,389 engineering stu- 
dents and 2,177 liberal arts students tested as part of the 
analyses for Form E Sixty-eight percent of engineering stu- 
dents preferred Thinking, compared with only 54% of lib- 
eral arts students. The liberal arts and engineering samples 
were combined, making a total sample of 4,566. The pro- 
portion of engineers was computed for each 12-point inter- 
val along the T-F scale, running both directions from zero. 
If the tendency to choose an engineering college is linked 
to a preference for Thinking or Feeling, then a discontinuity 


in the slope should occur at the division point. If the choice 
of engineering is related only to the clarity of the Thinking or 
Feeling preference, then the slope should be unbroken. In 
the analysis of the combined sample, each half of the scale 
was divided into five intervals of preference scores (1-11, 
13—23, 25—35, 37-47, 49+). A t-test was used to test for dil- 
ferences between intervals. Of the nine successive differences 
between adjacent intervals, only the one that fell at the divi- 
sion point was statistically significant (t = 3.25, p &lt; .001). The 
broken line in Figure 9.2 shows the disparity between the 
steepness at the division point compared to the more gradual 
slope in the two halves of the distribution. Table 9.13 shows 
the t-value for the difference between cach successive inter- 
val and the significant p-value at the midpoint. 


Faculty Ratings of Gregariousness and E-I Preference A com- 
parison of Extraverts and Introverts in “gregariousness” is 
an example of a large difference in a modest sample and is 
shown in Figure 9.3. As part of the Educational Testing Ser- 
vice College Student Characteristics Study, Ross (1961) 
obtained faculty ratings of student characteristics on a 
seven-point scale. Raters had no knowledge of students’ 


188 


Research 


A Gregariousness Rating | 


48 36 24 2 Q D 24 
E Scores 





36 48 60 


| Scores 


Figure 9.3 Faculty Ratings of Gregariousness in Students Who Reported Different Levels of Preference on the E-I Dichotomy 


MBTI results. Ross reported correlations of .50 between the 
E-! scale and “gregariousness” on a Solitary-Gregarious 
scale. The sample was a composite of students in four col- 
leges. The subsample of 249 cases shown in Figure 9.3 had 
a correlation between Extraversion and “gregariousness” of 
42. When Extraverts were correlated independently of 
Introverts, the correlation was only .05. The Introvert corre- 
lation independent of Extraverts was — 21. Figure 9.3 indi- 
cates that the faculty considered gregariousness a general 
characteristic of Extraverts, and it was not related to the 
degree of Extraversion. Introverts of any degree are seen as 
clearly less gregarious than Extraverts; in addition, Intro- 
verts having the clearest prelerence for Introversion on thc 
MBTI were seen as the least gregarious. 

As can be seen in the figure and in Table 9.13, the only 
significant change between contiguous intervals occurred 
between the ranges E 1-11 and I 1-11 (t = 2.80, p &lt; .01). The 
change at or near zero is significantly greater than changes 
between any other positions on the E-I scale. These data 
support both the existence of a dichotomy on the E-I scale 
ard the correctness of the location of its division point. 


Preference for Reading and Differences on the S-N Scale 
A comparison of number of books reported read by Sensing 
and Intuitive types is another example of a large difference in 
a modest sample. Hicks (1984) described reports of Sensing 
types and Intuitive types on the number of books reported 
being read in the past year. Figure 9.4 shows the mean num- 
ber of books reported being read for persons with different 


levels of preference for Sensing or Intuition. The largest dil- 
ference appears at the midpoint; the clearer the preference 
for Intuition, the more books are reported being read. 


Evidence for Dichotomies in Brain Activity Patterns 
Jung, Briggs, and Myers viewed type preferences as inborn 
dispositions to develop along specific lines. Type may thus 
be viewed as a basic template that directs and organizes life 
experiences and contributes to dilferential responses to 
similar life events. Jung saw personality as biologically based 
and concluded that type antithesis must have some kind of 
biological foundation as well (Jung, 1921/1971). Current 
methods such as topographic brain mapping and EEG 
recordings offer hope of uncovering these relationships. 
Differences betwcen Extraverts and Introverts have been 
studied by a number of researchers. Wilson and Languis 
(1989) discuss an approach to construct validation that 
involves an attempt to "establish a link between neurocogni- 
tive psychophysiological data and psychological type data 
through the investigation of differences in brain electrical 
activity patterns . . .” (p. 14). Their first study involved a 
comparison of those identified by the MBTI as having an 
Extraverted preference versus those with an Introverted prel- 
erence. To control for other aspects of type, all other prefer- 
ences were the same (NTP). Topographic brain mapping data 
were collected using a protocol based on standard measure- 
ment of cottical activity. The research literature on personal- 
ity differences was used to construct cognitive tasks that were 
administered during the measurement of evoked potentials. 


Table 9.13 


Interval l 2 3 


Engineering Study 

(Figure 9.2) 

t 1.4 1.29 0.74 
p 


Gregariousness Study 
(Figure 9.3) 


t 0.20 0.64 0.88 
p 


Validiy 189 


t-Values and Significance Between Intervals for Plots Shown in Figures 9.2 and 9.3 


|.28 2229 1.55 |.08 0.89 0.69 


0.00 | 


2.80 0.25 0.64 
0.01 


0.104 0.27 





A comparison of the Extraverts and Introverts is shown in 
Figure 9.5. Significant and consistent differences were found 
across a number of tests between the Extraverts and Intro- 
verts, suggesting that Extraverts demonstrate less cortical 
arousal than do Introverts. The authors hypothesize that the 
relatively greater cortical arousal of Introverts leads to their 
seeking to reduce stimulation from the environment; the 
authors plan to follow up with larger samples and samples 
of different preferences. 

In other research, Stenberg’s (1990) studies of blood flow 
show higher activity in anterior temporal lobes for Intro- 
verts, which may be related to Extraverts being geared to 
respond and seek excitement in order to avoid underarousal; 
in contrast, Introverts, who are geared to inspect, may be 
threatened by overarousal and seek out peaceful pursuits in 
solitude and tranquility. Evidence from longitudinal studies 
of temperament (Kagan &amp; Snidman, 1991) focusing on mea- 
sures of selected limbic sites provide similar support for a 
physiological basis for Extraversion and Introversion. 

Some evidence is also available regarding physiological 
differences in Sensing and Intuition. Newman (1985), 
using EEG alpha symmetry ratios, found that Intuitive 
types as a group showed greater levels of activity in the left 
hemisphere and Sensing types greater activation in the right 
hemisphere. Wilson and Languis (1989) reported a similar 
fiuding for adults with clear preferences for Extraverted 
Intuition and Extraverted Sensing; and in preliminary 
exploratory research, Wilson, Laposky, and Languis (1991) 
found a pattern of generalized posterior arousal for Intu- 
itive type middle school students. 

The growing evidence regarding the biological basis of 
psychological type gives credence to Jungs assumption that 
type is universal, that is, that the personalities of all human 
beings are structured in accord with type dichotomies. 


Studies of Behavioral Differences of the Types 


Carskadon (1979) reported on 40 psychology undergradu- 
ates asked to give a five-minute talk before six judges, with 
only five minutes’ notice. Extraverts stood closer to judges 
(p « .05), had fewer seconds of silence (p « .01), and after 
the talk remembered more names of the judges to whom 


40 


35 


30 


25 


20 


Reported Books per Year 


S e—————— ^ 


&gt;37 35-19 17-0 0-17 19-38 &gt;37 


Sensing Score Intuition Score 


Figure 9.4 Reported Books Read per Year as a Function 
of Sensing and Intuition Preference Scores 


they were introduced at the onset of the experiment (p &lt; 
001). Thorne (1987) reported communication differences 
between Extraverts and Introverts by asking undergraduate 
women to chat with a stranger. Extraverts paired with other 
Extraverts served as catalysts for mutual sociability. They 
explored a broader range of topics, looked for a variety of 
ways they were similar to one another, and discussed more 
pleasurable topics. Introverts paired with other Introverts 
tended not to look for common ground with one another 
beyond their similarity as students, more often hedged in 
their answers, and had problem-oriented discussions. More N 
moderate conversational patterns occurred when Extraverts 
were paired with Introverts. 

The staff of the Institute for Personality Assessment and 
Research (IPAR) included behavioral ratings by the staff as 
part of assessments. Data reported by Gough (1981) and 
Helson (1975) show significant correlations between rating 
instruments and MBTI preferences. Ratings are based on the 


190 Research 


MS EPOCH SCALE BANK + 
324 1824 B 1 d 

















FILE =D: AEP INEZ RECORD = 1 pas out 
C3 
A 
C4 
9 " 
P3 ^4 
Fl s 
PZ i 
P4 N 
OZ S 
AEF INTROVERT "BaMK2 MEAN. 
i EVOKED POTENTIAL ANALYSIS 
A brain map of a group of 17 high school males 
with clear preferences for Introversion perform- 
ing the auditory event related potential tone 
discrimination task. 
"no EPOCH SCALE BANE 
324 1424 8 1 
FILE-D:AEPEXRZ HECORD- 1 pos cut 
C3 ; RIGHT 
f 
C4 
D 
RS 
es 
PZ d 
P4 M 
oZ S A 
AEP EXTRAVERTS: BARKZ NEAN us 
"d (t 15 X 8 
EVOKED POTENTIAL ANALYSIS 1,7 - 
A brain map of a group of 16 high school males oo HF 
with clear preferences for Extraversion perform- | Av) j | 
ing the auditory event related potential tone RJ a / 
discrimination task. lu | ^N / 
[^n TOM À ( by — A - 
Figure 9.5 Evoked Potential Analysis for Extraverted and Introverted Students V 4 i 


“4 
Source: Scan generated by M. W. Alcock. Based on"A Topographic Study of Differences in the P300 Between Introverts and Extraverts,’ M. A. Wilson and M. L. Languis, 1990, 
Brain Topography, 2 (4). Used with permission. 


cC, 


Adjective Check List (ACL) (Gough &amp; Heilbrun, 1983) and 
the California Q-Sort (Block, 1978). The ACL was also used 
by Brooks and Johnson (1979) for self-ratings of undergrad- 
uate and graduate students and by Grant (1966) for self-rat- 
ings of specific types of college freshmen. Table 9.14 shows 
the staff ratings reported by Gough (1981) for 244 males and 
186 females assessed at IPAR and the self-ratings of 209 stu- 
dents reported by Brooks and Johnson (1979). An important 
paper by Gough (1965) discusses how data such as these can 
help provide a conceptual analysis of scale meaning. 

The descriptions are consistent with type theory, 
although some of the male Thinking terms fit male STs bet- 
ter than male NTs. Notice that the observers described the 
more positive aspects of Thinking in males and the more 
negative aspects of Thinking in females. They also de- 
scribed the more positive aspects of Feeling in females and 
the more negative aspects of Feeling in males. These differ- 
ences may come from the bias of the observers or from the 
reactions of those observed because they have preferences 
contrary to cultural stereotypes. 


a ee 


Studies of Creativity 


In type theory, creation of something entirely new should be 
related to a preference for Intuition. Intuition is the mode of 
perception that is oriented to possibilities and the future and 
to seeing hitherto unknown patterns. Creativity therefore is 
expected to be associated primarily with a preference for 
Intuition and secondarily with a preference for the perceiv- 
ing attitude, which gives curiosity and receptiveness. 

The earliest research with the MBTI and creative people 
was conducted at IPAR by Donald MacKinnon and his col- 
leagues (Gough, 1976, 1981; Hall &amp; MacKinnon, 1969; 
Helson, 1965, 1968, 1971, 1975; Helson &amp; Crutchfield, 
1970; MacKinnon, 1960, 1962a, 1962b, 1965, 1971). The 
data below that are not included in these publications were 
made available by IPAR for this manual. 

The IPAR samples of creative people were selected by 
peer nomination from professions judged to be creative; 
thus they represent highly creative people in creative fields. 
lt is useful, therefore, to compare the type distributions of 
highly creative people with one another, with samples of 
others in creative fields, and with the distribution of types 
in the general public. 

Table 9.15 shows correlations between the MBTI and the 
Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory (KAI; Kirton, 
1987) in two samples (Fleenor, 1997; Gryskiewicz &amp; 
Tullar, 1995). The correlations of the MBTI S—N and J-P 
scales with the total KAI score are similar and demonstrate 
a relationship between Intuition and Perceiving and the 
innovation (or, conversely, between Sensing and Judging 
and the adaptation) style of creativity. The opposite sign of 
the E-1 correlation in the two studies is curious, with sam- 
pling error being the most likely explanation, given the dis- 
parity in the sample sizes in the two studies. 


Validity 191 


Type distributions of samples of creative people show 
their preference for Intuition. The field in which they work 
makes little difference, although writers tend to be NF and 
mathematicians and scientists tend to be NT. To be appreci- 
ated, the percentage of Intuitive types among creative indi- 
viduals should be seen in perspective. The frequency of 
Intuitive types in the general population is roughly esti- 
mated at 25%. In the creative samples, all but three of the 
highly creative men in the four IPAR samples preferred 
Intuition. Comparison of this distribution with that of the 
selected college population yields a chi-square statistic of 
more than 50.00, an occurrence that could happen by 
chance less than one in a million times. 

If Intuition is a key factor in creativity, as theory would 
predict, then groups rated at different levels of crcativity 
should also differ in the proportion of Intuitive types. In Hall 
and MacKinnons (1969) data, architects in the first group 
were judged by other architects to be highly creative. Those 
in the second group were working with one of the highly cre- 
ative architects. The third group was a cross-section sample 
of members of the American Institute of Architects, matched 
to the creative architects on age and geographical location. 
The proportion of Intuitive types decreases significantly 
between the first, second, and third groups. The contrast 
between first and third groups yields a chi-square of 17.0 
(p &lt; .001). Not only docs the proportion of Intuitive types 
increase with level of creativity, but there is also an increasc in 
the Intuition preference score. The mean score for Intuition 
was 36.2 for the very creative group, 29.6 lor their colleagues, 
and 27.5 for the representative sample of architects. 

Where samples differ in level of creativity, less creative 
samples still have a majority of Intuitive types, but the pro- 
portion is lower. 1t may be also, as with the architects, that 
the most creative samples not only have more Intuitive 
types but also express a clearer preference for Intuition. 
Most samples have a majority of Introverts, though 
Extraverts and Introverts arc more nearly divided in cre- 
ative samples that are associated with performance. In most 
of the artistic samples, Feeling types are in the majority; in 
mathematics and science, Thinking types outnuniber feel- 
ing types. Isabel B. Myers predicted that creativity would be 
associated with the open, curious receptivity of the Perceiv- 
ing attitude. This prediction is mainly upheld. Indeed, in 
the samples grouped by levels of creativity, greater creativity 
is associated with a higher proportion of Perceiving types. 

Gough (1981) reported a series of samples ranked by an 
experimental MBTI Creativity Index based on 20 years of 
creativity research at IPAR. The experimental Creativity 
Index based on Form G continuous scores is as follows: 


MBTI Creativity Index = 3SN + JP — El — STF. 


For samples in which an external or internal criterion 
for creativity was available, the data show that the Creativ- 
ity Index is significantly and positively correlated with the 
criterion (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). 


192 


Research 


Table 9.14  Self-Descriptions and Rater Descriptions Associated with MBTI Preferences 








Extraversion Introversion 

Measure Measure 

Males Males 

ACL! Adaptable, alert, appreciative, good-looking, jolly, poised, ACL! Anxious, moody, preoccupied, aloof, apathetic, autocratic, 
warm. confused, distrustful, evasive, foolish, impatient, indifferent, 

irritable, pessimistic, self-centered, self-pitying, slow, worrying. 

ACL? Outgoing (—30), sociable (—.31), enthusiastic (—.22), optimistic ACL? Quiet (.24), reserved (.24), aloof (. 19), retiring (.20), inhibited 
(—.25), talkative (—.28), good-natured (—.26). (.19), shy (.17). 

Q-Sort? Emphasizes being with others (—.30), is talkative (-.24), Q-Sort? Keeps people at distance (.28), tends to ruminate and have 
behaves in assertive fashion (—.24), has a rapid personal preoccupying thoughts (.27), reluctant to commit self to 
tempo (-.|7), is facially and/or gesturally expressive (-.28). definite course of action (.20), tends toward overcontrol 

of needs (.28), is introspective and concerned with self as 
an object (.31). 

Females Females 

Nee Active, kind, adventurous, headstrong, informal, initiative, ACL! Honest, realistic, calm, complaining, fussy, lazy, methodical, 
opportunistic, sharpwitted, zany. modest, retiring. 

ACE Outgoing (—.45), sociable (—.44), enthusiastic (—.49), ACL? Quiet (.42), reserved (.40), aloof (.36), retiring (.35), 
optimistic (—.25), talkative (—.47), good-natured (—.36). inhibited (.33), shy (.29). 

Q-Sort? Emphasizes being with others (—50), is talkative (-.43), Q-Sort? Keeps people at distance (.48), tends to ruminate and have 


behaves in assertive fashion (—.35), has a rapid personal 
tempo (—.41), is facially and/or gesturally expressive (—.29). 


Males and Females 


ACL! 


Measure 


Males 
ACL! 


ACL? 


Q-Sorc 


Females 


ACL! 


ACL? 


Q-Sort? 


Interests wide, enthusiastic, forgiving, frank, outgoing, 
quick, sociable, talkative. 


Sensing 


Conservative, shy, aggressive. 


Conventional (—.4 1), conservative (—.38), practical (—.37). 
interests narrow (—.29), simple (—.28), natural (— 27), 
contented (—27), moderate (—21), commonplace (-.20). 


Favors conservative values (—.41), judges self and others in 
conventional terms (—39), uncomfortable with uncertainty 
and complexities (—.3 1), has a clear-cut, internally consistent 
personality (—.31), subjectively unaware of self-concern, 
feels satisfied with self (—.29). 


Quiet, deliberate, shy, formal. 


Conventional (—.43), conservative (—.35), simple (—.33), 
interests narrow (—.31), contented (-.16), shallow (~.25), 
natural (—.23), practical (~.20), moderate (—.18). 


Favors conservative values (—.39), judges self and others in 
conventional terms (—.38), uncomfortable with uncertainty 
and complexities (—.26), has a clear-cut, internally consistent 
personality (—.22),is subjectively unaware of self-concern, 


feels satisfied with self (—.20). 


-= Se oaneeswerr-&lt; ——————— —— — 


preoccupying thoughts (.30), reluctant to commit self to 
definite course of action (.41), tends toward overcontrol 
of needs (.48), is introspective and concerned with self as 
an object (.17). 


mmu m UUXOe7— NCC uot 7 TERT Cae 7a ete c mint S NEBST riora a alia rao EI Dott ooi am atro reete rn 


Males and Females 


ACL! Quiet, reserved, shy, careless, defensive, inhibited, mild, 

silent, tense, timid, wary, withdrawn. 
Intuition 

Measure 

Males 

ACL! Adaptable, interests wide, sensitive, complicated, 
foresighted, idealistic, intelligent, outspoken, reflective, 
resourceful, sexy, talkative, trusting, unconventional. 

ACL? Original (.22), artistic (.20), imaginative (.25), ingenious (.32), 


complicated (.31), unconventional (.26), reflective (.24), 
curious (.22), individualistic (.21), interests wide (.20). 


Q-Sort? Associates to ideas in unusual ways (.43), rebellious and 
nonconforming (.36), values intellectual/cognitive matters 
(.25), high degree of intellectual capacity (.24), unpredictable 
in behaviors and attitudes (.24). 





um tem p n Epi uat rf m gun panne ann RRS n Het TEI mnn n a FL EC LO CTRL 


ACL' Forgiving, imaginative, absent-minded, clever, flirtatious, 


rebellious, resourceful. 


ACL? Original (.22), artistic (.20), imaginative (.25), ingenious 
(.22), complicated (.27), unconventional (.20), reflective 


(.19), curious (.27), individualistic (.31), interests wide (.21). 


Q-Sort? Associates to ideas in unusual ways (.36), high degree of 
intellectual capacity (.32), unpredictable in behavior and 
attitudes (.32), rebellious and nonconforming (.31), 
genuinely values intellectual matters (.31). 


~e mium i  — 7 a a 7 ln t m ate c alert ^ a Tt e s ea 


Validity — 193 





Table 9.14 Self-Descriptions and Rater Descriptions Associated with MBTI Preferences conunued 


Thinking 
Measure 
Males 
REE Alert, logical, assertive. 


ACU Conventional (—.27), conservative (—.25), moderate (—.23), 


interests narrow (—.21), steady (—.21). 


Q-Sort? Prides self on being objective, rational (-.36), judges self 
and others in conventional terms (—.29), favors conservative 


values (-.25). 
Females 
ACL! Defensive, hurried. 
ACL? Hard-hearted (—.32), fault-finding (—30). logical (—27). 


ambitious (—.26), opinionated (—.26), severe (—26), cold 
(—.25), hostile (-.24). 


Q-Sort? Prides self on being objective (—.32), critical, skeptical, not 
easily impressed (—.30), basically distrustful of people, 
questions their motives (—.30). 


Judgment 
Measure 
Males 
ACL! Honest, reasonable, progressive, attractive, hard-hearted. 


ACL? Conservative (—.39), conventional (—.29), industrious 


(—.26), dependable (—.22), organized (—.24). 


Q-Sort? Favors conservative values (—.34), is fastidious (—.28), 
tends toward overcontrol of needs (—.23), judges self and 
others in conventional terms (—.32), is moralistic (~.25). 


ee eee 


Females 

ACL! Cautious, sympathetic, clear-thinking, dependable, 
cooperative, dignified, industrious, painstaking, practical, 
precise. 

ale Conservative (—39), conventional (—.37), industrious (—.33), 


dependable (—.32), organized (—.24). 


Q-Sort? Favors conservative values (—.34), is fastidious (—37), tends 
toward overcontrol of needs (—.38), judges self and others 
in conventional terms (—.25), is moralistic (—30). 


Males and Females 


ACL! Realistic, efficient, stable, moderate, organized, planful, 


thorough. 


Feeling 
Measure 
Males 
ACL! Curious, interests wide, kind, humorous, unselfish. 


ACL? Despondent (.27), artistic (.26), original (.26), interests wide. 


Q-Sort? Enjoys aesthetic impressions (.27), tends to be rebellious 
(.20), has insight into motive and character (.19). 


Females 
ACL! Sympathetic, soft-hearted, forgiving. 
ACU Trusting (.31), affectionate (.30), pleasant (.30), sympathetic 


(.26), soft-hearted (.22). 


Q-Sort Has warmth, capacity for close relationships (.35), tends 
to arouse acceptance in people (.30), is personally 


charming (.24). 
Perception 
Measure 
Males 
ACL! Forgetful. 
ACL? Disorderly (.28), careless (.30), adventurous (.26), 


pleasure-seeking (.21), lazy (.29), changeable (.23), 
restless (.23). 


Q-Sort^ Tends to be rebellious (.40), enjoys sensuous experiences 
(.32), is unpredictable in behavior and attitudes (.22), is 
self-indulgent (.18), various needs tend toward relatively 
direct expression (.24). 


—————t " —! ———————À——————— 


Females 
ACL! Disorderly, fickle, pleasure-seeking, self-seeking. 
ACL? Disorderly (.25), careless (.29), adventurous (.26), 


pleasure-seeking (.31), lazy (.22), changeable (.27), 
restless (.23). 


Q-Sort? Tends to be rebellious (.32), enjoys sensuous experiences 
(.32), is unpredictable in behavior and attitudes (.40), is 
self-indulgent (.44), various needs tend toward relatively 
direct expression (.25). 





Note: Negative correlations are associated with E, S, T, and J; positive correlations with l, N, E and P 


l Brooks &amp; Johnson, 1979 Undergraduate and graduate students (106 male, 103 female) described themselves using the Adjective Check List (ACL). 
All adjectives discriminated significantly between preferences at least at p &lt; .05. Listed are the three adjectives with the greatest differentiation plus any 


others unique to that preference. 


2 = : ee (t = 2 3 
^ Gough, 1981. For the 244 males sample, correlations of .13 are significant at p &lt; .05, .16 at p &lt; .01, .21 at p &lt; 001. For the 186 females sample, correlations 
of .14 are signihcant at p &lt; 05, .19 at p &lt; Ol, and .24 at p &lt; 001. Adjective Check Lists and Q-Sorts are based on observations by at least five stall members. 


194 . Research 


Table 9.15 Correlation of MBTI Continuous 
Scores (Form F) and the 
Kirton Adoption and Innovation 
Inventory in Two Samples 


N E- SN T-F J-P Summary 

Rule/Group 12,115 —Il 45 -—0Ol  .40 -N-P 
Conformity 

Sufficiency 12,115 —.30 47 -.05 .32 EN-P 
of Originality 

Efficiency 12,415 | —Il .34 3 48 —N-P 
Total 12,115  —23 $4 Ol 49 EN-P 
KAI Total 49 21 4) —19 Al IN-P 





Source: Top part of table from “The Relationship Between the MBTI and Measures 

of Personality and Perlormance in Management Groups," by J. W Fleenor, 1997, 

in Developing Leaders (p. 128). Palo Alto, CA Davies-Black. Copyright 1997 by 
Davies-Black. Used with permission. Last line from “The Relationship Between 
Personality Type and Creativity Style Among Managers," by N. D Gryskiewacz and 
W L Tallar, 1995, Journal of Psychological Type, 32, p. 33. Copyright 1995 by Journal 
of Psychological Type. Used with permission. 


Gough estimated that in IPAR samples that contain 
many highly creative people, males with Index scores of 
350 or higher can be expected to show creative potential; 
men with scores of 250 or lower will be less likely to show 
creative talent. Creativity Index scores calculated from sam- 
ples not selected as creative, such as the approximately 
16,000 males and females in the MBTI databank in 1985, 
are substantially lower than for the IPAR samples, as would 
be expected, averaging 239 for males and 233 for females. 

A number of other researchers have studied the relation- 
ship between the MBTI and creativity. Representative stud- 
ies can be found in Cropley (1965); Owen (1962); Ruane 
(1973); Whittemore and Heimann (1965); Burt (1968): 
Stephens (1975); Erickson, Gantz, and Stephenson (1970); 
and Gryskiewicz (1982). 

Creativity and originality in these studies continue to be 
associated with Intuition and Perceiving, even in early ado- 
lescence. As in the data above, the association with the T—F 
and E-1 dichotomies is less clear, though originality may bc 
more apparent in Extraverts in younger samples. 


Other Representative Studies 
of Differences Between Preferences 


This section describes other studies relevant to Jungs theory. 
Studies related to careers and education are not included 
here. Carlson and Levy (1973) and Carlson (1980) tested 
type theory by predicting which types should have the maxi- 
mum difference on specific variables. They selected these 
types for experiments testing their hypotheses. 

The Carlson and Levy (1973) study tested the relation- 
ship between the MBTI and the following: 


B Short-term memory using the Digit Span of the Wechsler 
Adult Intelligence Scale? and memory for faces in the 
Lightfoot Facial Expression Series. They found that ITs 
scored higher than EFs on digit span, and EFs scored 
higher than ITs on recognizing faces. 

E Memory task performance using geometric figures with 
numbers on the sides and geometric figures with fictitious 
names on the sides. They found that Hs were higher than 
EFs in the discrepancy between numbers minus names. 

B Person perception using recorded judgments of 20 stan- 
dardized slides, 2 each for 10 emotions. They found that 
NPs scored higher than SJs, and females scored higher 
than males. 

B Volunteering for social service using the amount of vol- 
unteering of 10 students in a halfway house. They found 
7 of IO volunteers and only 1 of the controls to be ENFP 
or ENTP. 


Carlson (1980) tested the following relationships between 
the MBTI and other variables: 


B Quality of alfective memories was tested using blind rat- 
ings of critical incidents recalling significant personal 
experience by judges familiar with type theory. Carlson 
found that judges correctly identified eight of nine EF 
types and five of six IT types. 

8 Interpersonal closeness or distance using the same set of 
memories as above but rated for presence of individual 
or interpersonal quality. Carlson found that Introverts 
gave more individual and Extraverts more interpersonal 
memories of joy, excitement, and shame. 

@ Cognitive clarity and vividness of feeling using the same 
set of memories as above edited to leave only statements 
of personal experience, also rated blind by a new set of 
judges. EF memories were rated significantly more vivid 
in expression than IT memories in joy, excitement, and 
shame. 

B Type dillerences in personal constructs using judges’ 
blind ratings of concrete or inferential constructs on an 
abbreviated version of the Role Construct Repertory Test 
(Kelly, 1955). Judges identified inferential constructs on 
16 of 20 Intuitive types and 3 of 14 Sensing types. See 
also Howland (1971) for a similar study. 


Orientation to Time Type theory predicts that Sensing 
types are more oriented to present events since the present 
is what can be perceived by the senses. Intuitive types are 
more attuned to the future, since Intuition is the function 
that sces possibilities beyond the immediate present. 
Thinking types are expected to be more concerned with the 
sequence of time from past through present to future, since 
Thinking is concerned with cause-effect sequences. Feeling 
types are expected to be more oriented toward the past, 
since values are transmitted as the heritage of the past. For 
cach type, the two functions may complement or conflict 
with one another. For example, SF is concerned with the 
present moment, but thc present moment is colored by past 


values. Thus one would expect SF types to be relatively 
more conservative. The NF group, however, can be seen as 
pulled toward the future by [Intuition and toward the past 
by Feeling. These contrasting forces can be expected to 
differ in the four NF types as a result of the interplay of 
the dominant and auxiliary functions and depending on 
whether these are extraverted or introverted. Time per- 
spective of the Jungian functions is discussed in Mann, 
Siegler, and Osmond (1968). 

There are fewer hypotheses about time and the attitudes, 
though one would expect Extraverts to be more aware of 
time changes in the world around them and to see time in 
more discrete units. Introverts should be more oriented 
toward ideas that have more continuity and relatively less 
aware of changes in the world around them. Thus Intro- 
verts may be expected to be less accurate in evaluating the 
time of events. 

[sabel Myers hypothesized that Intuitive types are less 
accurate than Sensing types in projecting how long any 
given task will require. Seeing possibilities in a sudden 
flash, Intuitive types would underestimate the time it takes 
to work out necessary details and to bring the possibility to 
completion. Organized Judging types can be expected to 
take time more seriously than spontaneous Perceiving types 
and to be more effective in meeting deadlines. 

Evans (1976) and Yang (1981) supported theoretical 
connections between Sensing and the present, Intuition and 
the future, Feeling and the past, and Thinking and no time 
zone. Studies of type differences in ease of visualizing the 
future found longer extensions with Intuition and Thinking 
and shorter ones with Sensing and Feeling (Harrison, 1984; 
Nightingale, 1973; Seiden, 1970; Smith, 1976). 

One would expect Extraverts to experience the world in 
discrete units of time. This expectation was supported by 
Seiden (1970), who found that Extraverts related their 
identity to events or ceremonies that represented change. 
Extraverts were also more accurate in autokinetic time per- 
ception (Veach &amp; Touhey, 1971). Intreverts, who are ori- 
ented to ideas that are more continuous than external 
events, see lime as more continuous (Seiden, 1970) or 
oceanic (Knapp &amp; Lapuc, 1965). Nightingale (1973) found 
that Introverts extend time farther back into the past; 
Extraverts extend time farther forward into the future. 

Organized Judging types can be expected to take time 
more seriously than spontaneous Perceiving types and to be 
more effective in meeting deadlines. Evidence for J-P differ- 
ences in time management appears in a study by Jaffe (1980), 
in which Sensing, Thinking, and Judging managers were 
more successful with management by objectives. In student 
populations there are often significant correlations between 
Judging and planning and control, which are essential cle- 
ments of time management. For example, Table 9.16 shows 
the correlations of MBTI Form G continuous scores with the 
Time Management Questionnaire (Williams, Verble, Price, &amp; 
Layne, 1995) in a sample of 204 students. The correlation of 
time management attitudes with Judging is clear. In other 


Validity — 195 





Table 9.16 Correlation of MBTI Continuous 
Scores (Form G) and the Time 
Management Questionnaire 


E-1  S-N T-F J-P Summary 


Short-Range M —24 -18 26 à —58 E-F| 
Planning F EM 06-107 E 4c 
MF -—I8 -.08 .I2 -SI —j 
Long-Range M —27 -3l 09 -38 ES-J 
Planning F S0] | S — 
MF —.07 -20 04 -.42 -5-| 
Time Attitudes M -10 -—13 -22  -.06 &lt;p 
F -.0l AS -.05 —17 — 
MF -.03 09 -.09 -—-14 — 
Total Score M =30 ,—28" .|3- —56 ES] 
F -10 -.04 —.08  -.48 ——]J 
MF —I5 -.09 O05 -SI —] 


Note: N = 204, 48 males, 156 females. 


Source: From "Relauonship Between Time-Management Practices and Personality 
Indices and Types," by R.L Williams, j. S. Verble, D. E. Price, and B. H. Lane, 1995, 
Journal of Psychological Type, 34, p. 38. Copynght 1995 by Journal of Psychological 
Type. Used with permission 


studies, Judging students took fewer incompletes (Smith, 
Irey, &amp; McCaulley, 1973), and Judging medical school appli- 
cants completed their applications earlier (Kainz &amp; McCaul- 
ley, 1975). Sex differences also appear to be important in 
some samples; Marcus (1976) and Squyres (1980) also found 
differences in the populations they studied, and in the 
Williams et al. (1995) study, long-range planning was corre- 
lated with Extraversion and Sensing as well as with Judging. 

The studies provide support for the predicted differences 
in the experience and use of time for different MBTI types. 
There is another important study of type and time orienta- 
tion by Harrison and Lawrence (1985). However, since this 
study was primarily concerned with whole types rather 
than individual preferences, the results are reported in the 
whole type section of this chapter. 


Fantasy and Imagery Representative studies of fantasy and 
imagery and MBTI types are Edmunds (1982), Ireland and 
Kernan-Schloss (1983), O'Haire and Marcia (1980), and 
Palmiere (1972). These studies found that, as predicted, 
both fantasy and imagery are of more interest to Intuitive 
types. In addition, significant differences are found 
concerning the content and affect of images. The results of 
these studies can be related to the time orientation studies 
in that fantasy and imagery can be conceived of as ways of 
suspending time. 


Introversion and the Preference for Privacy Marshall 
(1971) studied preference for privacy using a newly devcl- 
oped scale called the Preference for Privacy Scale (PPS), 


196 Research 


which relates 10 a number of psychological and life behavior 
measures. The two preferences most closely associated with 
affiliation on the PPS are Extraversion and Feeling. Grant 
(1965) found that the four EF types among Auburn 
students were the only types that stated significantly more 
often that they dated more than once a week and had no 
trouble finding dates. The Introverts and especially the IT 
types were dating less or not at all. The two preferences 
most closely associated with a need for privacy are 
Introversion and Thinking. 

Marshalls data show a consistent tendency for Introverts 
to prefer privacy on all the subscales of the PPS, but the 
most important aspects of privacy for both Introverts and 
Thinking types are personal space and lack of pressure for 
self-disclosure. Laypeople sometimes interpret Introversion 
and Thinking as being associated with a dislike of or a lack 
of need for people. The data are more consistent with the 
idea that Introverts and Thinking types enjoy the company 
of others, as long as they have their needed privacy or are 
not under great stress. 


Optimism and Pessimism Isabel Myers believed that 
Sensing and Intuition are often related to a pessimistic or 
optimistic attitude. In a difficult situation, the tendency of 
Sensing is to assume that what is will not change. Clinicians 
(e.g., von Franz, 1971) note that tvpes with Sensing 
dominant often find that when intuitions do occur to them, 
these are negative and pessimistic. (In ihe dynamics of type 
theory, Intuition in a dominant Sensing type would be less 
conscious and differentiated and therefore less adept at 
coping with reality problems.) The more optimistic 
tendency of Intuitive types is to assume that the situation 
may be difficult now but that some hitherto unseen 
possibility will turn up. 

Extraversion and Introversion can be related to opti- 
mism for a different reason. Extraverts in theory are more at 
home in the world, and thus they may also report them- 
selves as more competent to cope with its demands. 

Quenk (1966) looked at type differences as part of a 
study of fantasy and personal outlook in relation to opti- 
mism, pessimism, realism, and anxiety. Responses of the 25 
male and 32 female subjects who recorded daydreams for 
10 days showed consistent sex dilferences. Significant 
MBTI findings were that optimists were more likely to be 
Extraverts in both sexes; female optimists were more likely 
to be Intuitive types, and male optimists were more likely to 
be Thinking types; anxious females were more likely to be 
Introverts and Intuitive types; anxious males were more 
likely to be Feeling types. In another aspect of the study, 
students reporting realistic fantasies were reported to have a 
clearer preference for Sensing, as would he predicted. 

Vaughan and Knapp (1963) reported a study of dimen- 
sions of pessimism in which a number of instruments, 
including the MBTI, were administered to 75 male Wesleyan 
University undergraduates. Pessimism was significantly asso- 
ciated with Introversion and Thinking, confirming the E-I 
difference found by Quenk but not the male T-F difference. 


Prediction of Specialty Choices in Medicine Isabel 
Myers’ medical sample provides an example of long-term 
prediction of type differences. She followed her longitudinal 
sample of 5,355 medical students over a decade from 
admission to medical school and found specialty choices 
significantly in the directions predicted by type theory. 
McCaulley (1977) followed up on the sample a decade 
later and found that those who changed specialty 
significantly more often moved to specialties appropriate for 
their types; the effect was greater for Intuitive types than for 
Sensing types. 


Validity of Whole Types 
and Type Dynamics 


Since the purpose of the Indicator is to help people identify 
their whole type, validation of the instrument as a measure 
of the theory requires evidence that the four dichotomies 
combine in such a way that the whole is greater than the 
sum of its parts. In other words, characteristics or behavior 
based either on whole types or on combinations of prefer- 
ences demonstrating type dynamics should not be explain- 
able based on knowledge of the preferences alone. Because 
the instrument is based on a complex theory, establishing 
this kind of validity is more difficult than acquiring evi- 
dence for the validity of the four individual scales. This sec- 
tion presents validity evidence for whole types and for com- 
binations of preferences based on type dynamics theory. 


Comparison of MBTI Types 
with Self-Estimates of Type 


One way to validate the MBTI assessment tool that avoids 
some of the problems identified above is to compare MBTI 
results with self-assessment of type preferences. The chance 
of picking the correct type is I out of 16, or 6.25%. There 
have been two kinds of studies of best-fit type, differenti- 
ated on the basis of how the persons self-assessment of type 
was determined. One category includes assessments that 
are based on agreement with written type descriptions of 
Myers and others. While the focus of some of these studies 
has actually been on the accuracy of the written type 
descriptions themselves, the results provide evidence for 
the existence of the typology to the extent that the type 
descriptions are based on Jungs and Myers’ theories of 
types and not on collections of sentences derived from defi- 
nitions of the individual preferences. Comparisons with 
descriptions written by Myers and her colleagues are partic- 
ularly important because they were purposely constructed 
to include statements based on type dynamics theory. 

The other category includes a “verification” process that 
differs by study, although most use brief, nonstandardized 
descriptions of the individual preferences. Table 9.17 pro- 
vides a brief summary of the results of all these studies. 


Table 9.17 Summary of Studies of Agreement Between F 


Study Form N 
Hammer &amp; Yeakley (1987) G 120 
Kummerow (1988) G EE wid Pal 
G 106 M 
G 104 F 
Walck (1992b) G 256 
Midpoint Study (1997, cf. Ch. 7) M 158 
Form M/Form G Study (1998) M 2 
G 92 
Research Form Study (1996, cf. Ch. 7) M 2.116 
G 2,116 
Oxford Psychologists Press (1993) G 370 
Qualifying Programs G S 3 3472 
989 F 
Type Description Studies 
Carskadon (1982) For G 129 
Carskadon &amp; Cook (1982) For G 118 
Ware &amp; Yokomoto (1985) G 343 


Adults in Workshops 


197 








Validity 
.eported ani ypes 

Sample Agreement 
Community Adults 8576 
Retail Managers 6476 
Bank Managers 66% 
Bank Managers 58% 
Students 7576 l 
Community and Organization Adults 7876 "i J 
Community Adults 58% « |J 

53% 
Adults and Students E 
Adults and Students 5876 
Adults in Workshops 76% 
Adults in Workshops 8176 

8276 


Students 3576 ranked actual 
type description first 

Students S076 ranked actual 
type description first 

Students 62% rated actual 


type description highest 





Carskadon (1982) and Carskadon and Cook (1982) 
conducted studies of 129 and 118 introductory psychology 
students, respectively. In each study, students were asked to 
rank five of Myers descriptions from Introduction to Type: 
(a) the type reported by the MBTI, (b) the type with the 
least clear preference reversed, (c) the type with the same 
functions but E-I and J-P reversed, (d) the type with S-N 
and T—F reversed, and (e) the type with all four letters dif- 
ferent from the reported type. The reported type was ranked 
first significantly more often than chance for both samples 
(3596 p « .001, and 5096 p « .001). 

When choices for the descriptions of the reported type 
and the type with the closest scale reversed were combined, 
the percentages of students rating one or the other of these 
first were 66% for the first study and 75% for the second 
study. The percentages of students giving first rank to the 
opposite of the reported type were +% and 13% in the two 
studies. Students in both studies were significantly (p &lt; 
.001) less likely to select as most accurate the description 
differing from the reported type on the functions (S-N and 
T-F) than they were to choose the type differing from the 
reported type on the attitudes (E-l and J-P}. The authors 
concluded that (a) the idea that type descriptions other than 
ones reported type might be equally appealing had been 
refuted and (b) their subjects seemed to feel more confi- 
dence or certainty in their preferred functions (S, N, T, or F) 
and/or more flexibility in their attitudes (E, 1, J, or P). These 


\ 


/ 


findings strongly refute any suggestion that respondents 
interpret MBTI type descriptions as simple horoscopes. 

In a similar study, Ware and Yokomoto (1985) asked stu- 
dents to rate (ona scale of 0 to 100%) the accuracy of differ- 
ent type profiles developed by David Keirsey. Unknown to 
the participants, one of these profiles matched their type as 
determined hy the MBTI, while the others varied in system- 
atic ways. The type description based on their MBTI type 
was rated highest, at 6296. The description yielding the next 
highest rating (4796) was the one that resulted from chang- 
ing the preference letter associated with the persons lowest 
preference score to its opposite. 

We turn now to the methodology whereby the self- 
assessment is made after receiving an MBTI interpretation 
from a trained professional. Hammer and Yeakley (1987) 
studied a sample of 120 adults who had participated in 
workshops and individual interviews. Results indicated 
that 85% of the sample produced perfect agreement on all 
four preferences and that 99% of the sample agreed on at 
least three of the four. All the individuals who disagreed on 
one or more preference scales had preference scores of 
seven points or less on the scale in dispute. 

Kummerow (1988) examined the agreement between 
best-ht type and MBTI reported type in samples of retail 
managers and male and female bank managers who had par- 
ticipated in an MBTI training program. The procedure fol- 
lowed by the participants in arriving at their self-assessment 


198 Research 


of type is well documented, making this study a model for 
other such studies. The agreements with whole type were 
6496, 66%, and 58%, respectively. The agreement of three or 
more letters was 97%, 95%, and 90% for these samples. The 
T-F scale showed the lowest rate of agreement. 

Walck (1992b) asked for scl{-assessments of type from a 
sample of 256 undergraduates who participated in an exer- 
cise in which (a) a counsclor explained type theory, (b) sub- 
jects wrote an essay documenting the reasons for their self- 
assessed choice of type, (c) subjects read Myers (1987), and 
(d) essays were reviewed and rcturned to the subjects for 
clarification as necessary. Identification of whole best-fit 
types and reported MBTI types agreed for 75% of the sub- 
jects; approximately 96% agreed on at least three of the four 
preferences. Walck also found that over 8096 of the dis- 
agrcements between best-fit type and MBTI-measured type 
occurred among individuals with "slight" preferences 
(1-9). Disagreement was most prevalent on the T—F scale. 

The agreement between best-fit type and MBTI reported 
type has been determined for participants attending the 
MBTI qualifying programs (Hammer, Prehn, &amp; Mitchell, 
1994). At thc end of each four- or five-day workshop partic- 
ipants are asked to complete a best-fit type questionnaire. 
The whole type agreement for males is 8196 (N 2 533) and 
for females 82% (N = 989). These findings are especially 
important because of the size of the samples and because 
the intensive training experience offers multiple opportuni- 
ties for participants to assess their best-fit type. 

While the results are not shown in Table 9.17 because 
they focused solely on the T-F scale, Harris and Carskadon 
(1988) conducted a study of self-assessment accuracy with 
339 male and 306 female students. Using the current Form 
G weights, the agreement between the students’ MBTI T-F 
preference and their self-assessment of the T-F preference 
was 61% for the males and 79% for the females. 

Three self-assessment studics have been conducted with 
Form M to date. The results are also shown in Table 9.17. In 
the sample used to set the midpoint of the preference scales, 
the agreement between best-fit and Form M-based whole 
types was 78% (see Chapter 7 for a description of this pro- 
ccdure). The large-scale best-fit study used as a basis for 
determining the optimal scoring procedure yielded a num- 
ber of estimates of best-fit agreement, some based on item 
response theory (IRT) methods and others on prediction 
ratio methods lor sclecting items and scoring. The best IRT 
mcthod yielded 6496 and the best prediction ratio (PR) 
method 58% overall agreement. Note that these are proba- 
bly underestimates of true hit rates because no attempt had 
been made to optimize the midpoint for either procedure. 
The third self-assessment study compared Form G and 
Form M results with best-fit type in a sample of 92 adults 
from a small rural midwestern town who had no previous 
exposure to the MBTI. The agreement with best-fit type for 
Form G was 53% and for Form M was 58%. It is interesting 
to note that most of the “misses” in this sample occurred in 
older respondents (in their 70s and 80s). 


The results of past best-fit type studies have been gener- 
ally quite supportive of the construct validity of the MBTI, 
with whole type agreements ranging from 53% to 85%. 
Samples of adults that used multiple verification procedures 
generally have higher agreement. All of the percentage 
agreements from studics using this methodology are far 
above the chance value of 6.25%. In the Form G samples 
the T-F scale showed the lowest agreement. 

In the methodology using written type descriptions, the 
agreement has ranged from 35% to 6296, with the former 
coming from the study where subjects were required to 
rank, not rate, clescriptions. These figures also are far above 
the chance value. Even more telling is the fact that in two of 
these studies the rating of the opposite type description was 
496 and 13%. 

This percentage agreement in the best-fit studies is cven 
more impressive when agreement on three instead of all four 
letters of the type is considered; these percentages ranged 
over 95% in all studies in which this was reported. This is 
important because in an instrument like the MBTI, where 
whole type is arrived at using four separate scales, high levels 
of agreement for whole type require extremely high levels of 
agrcement on cach scale. For example, if the best-fit agree- 
ment was, say, 9096 on each preference scale, and we multi- 
ply these percentages as if they were independent probabili- 
tics, the expected percentage agreement is only 66%. So 
agreements in the 70% and 80% ranges indicate a very high 
degree of validity, in terms of percentage agreement, for the 
individual MBTI scales. 

It is also intcresting to note that in the few studies that 
reported agreement by clarity of preference, almost all of 
the disagrcements occurred on scales for which the person 
had a preference clarity index in the “slight” range. A 
number of those people may have reported in that range 
not because of a lack of measurement precision but 
because they were genuinely unclear about their prefer- 
ences. If these people are excluded, the validities are very 
high indeed. 

Another factor alfecting the percentage agreement in any 
best-fit or type description study is the quality (reliability 
and validity) of the stimulus that is being used to clicit the 
self-assessment of type. In some cases (e.g., Kummerow, 
1988, or the qualifying programs) the procedure has been 
described quite accurately and it seems likely that the per- 
son had cvery opportunity to discover his or her best-fit 
type. In some studies, it may be that the MBTI results are 
actually better predictors of “true” type than are the stimuli 
being used in the verification process. If the stimuli consist 
of lists of words, work bchavior examples, or personal 
cxamples that are idiosyncratic to the interpreter, they may 
be responsible for much more “noise” in the self-assessment 
than is present in the assessment accomplished by the stan- 
dard and tested items of the Indicator. It is also important in 
conducting such studies that the self-assessments arc per- 
formed before the people receive their results in a feedback 
session. 


Table 9.18 Type Dynamics Groups for Each Function 


DominantThinking Auxiliary Thinking 
DIT AIT 

Introverted (ITP) Introverted (ETP) 
ISTP ENTP 

INTP ESTP 

DET AET 

Extraverted (ETJ) Extroverted (1T) 

EST] INTJ 

ENT} IST] 


Dominant Feeling 


Auxiliary Feeling 


Dominant Sensing 


Validity 


Auxiliary Sensing 


DIS AIS 

Introverted (ISJ) Introverted (ESJ) 
IST] E51] 

ISF] ESF] 

DES AES 

Extraverted (ESP) Extroverted (ISP) 
ESTP ISTP 

ESEP ISFP 


199 


Dominant Intuition 


Auxiliary Intuition 


DIN 


DIF AIF 

Introverted (IFP) Introverted (EFP) 
ISFP ENFP 

INFP ESFP 

DEF AEF 

Extraverted (EFJ) Extraverted (IF) 
ESF} INF] 

ENF} ISF| 


AIN 
Introverted (INJ) Introverted (ENJ) 
INTJ ENTJ 
INFJ ENFJ 
DEN AEN 
Extraverted (ENP) Extraverted (INP) 
ENTP INTP 
ENEP INFP 





Preference Scale Interactions 


For the purposes of analysis, the four preference scales can be 
combined in many ways, but two broad categories can be 
defined. In the first category are those combinations explicitly 
defined by the theory. These are the combinations of all four 
preferences that yield a complete type, as well as the combi- 
nations of fewer preferences that reflect the dynamic aspects 
of the types (e.g., dominant extraverted Thinking types). 

The second category of preference combinations might 
be called elementary intcractions. These are interactions 
among preferences that can provide evidence for the typo- 
logical nature of the theory because they represent the ele- 
ments of whole types. Although these combinations of pref- 
erences are not derived specifically from the dynamic 
aspects of the theory to the extent that significant interac- 
tions among preferences can be demonstrated, they are 
important as building blocks of the theory. Many of these 
combinations are also of interest in applied situations. The 
elementary interactions used most frequently involve pairs 
of preferences, such as ST, SE NE and NT, although some 
combinations of three preferences have also received aiten- 
tion. See Chapter 4 of this manual and Hirsh (1992) for 
labels given to various letter combinations, descriptions of 
the characteristics associated with each, and explanations 
of how they are used by practitioners. 

In either case, type theory predicts that the interactions of 
preferences result in behaviors that cannot be predicted from 


each preference separately. Because each preference in a 
given type interacts with all of the other preferences in that 
type, type theory posits that any combination of two or more 
preferences will yield behaviors that are more than the sum 
of the parts. Validity research at this level focuses on demon- 
strating that various combinations of two-, three-, and four- 
letter preferences interact to produce behavior that cannot be 
accounted for by the same preferences considered separately. 

Combinations of preferences derived from type dynamics 
are specific interactions between the E-I and J-P dichotomies 
that serve to identify the forms (dominant or auxiliary) and 
attitudes (introverted or extraverted) of the Perceiving and 
Judging functions. The characteristics associated with the 
forins and attitudes of the functions transcend the set of gen- 
eral qualities associated with each function. Dominant ex- 
traverted Sensing, for example, refers to type characteristics 
that are qualitatively unique and different from those charae- 
teristics shared by all Sensing types. This pattern of interac- 
tions creates within each type (a) a hierarchy of development 
of the four functions and (b) their accessibility to conscious 
control. Type dynamics give each function within a type its 
status (as either a dominant, auxiliary, tertiary, or inferior 
function) and its attitude (introverted or extraverted). Type 
dynamics for all functions and types are shown in Table 9.18. 

Validity research on dynamics involves finding evi- 
dence that among and within types the dominant, auxil- 
iary, tertiary, and inferior functions and their attitudes can 


200 Research 


be distinguished from each other and that the characteris- 
tics associated with each are in accord with those predicted 
by type theory. Because this is a relatively recent area of 
research, however, it is not always obvious how to translate 
the predictions of type theory into researchable questions. 
Future researchers may find additional important questions 
that have yet to be asked in this area. Nevertheless, some 
important steps have been taken and are reviewed below. 

To understand and critically evaluate some of the evi- 
dence that has accumulated at the level of whole types and 
type dynamics, we must first understand some of the partic- 
ular problems entailed in validating a theory-based instru- 
ment. These problems reveal some subtleties of the theory 
that tend to be overlooked when type is discussed only at a 
conceptual level. One of the advantages of using a theory- 
based instrument like the MBTI, however, is that the inter- 
play between theory and research enriches both. 


Issues in Conducting Validity Studies 
of Preference Interactions 


Validity studies of preference interactions, whether they be 
whole types or type dynamics, raise unique problems that 
must be understood before results can be interpreted and 
understood. Many of these problems arise from attempts to 
apply methodologies developed for and based on trait 
instruments to the study of typological theories. Among the 
problems discussed here are the following: 


m Use of dependent variables rich enough to validate the 
multifaceted constructs of type theory 

æ Use of a criterion with adequate precision 

&amp; Dependent variables with sufficient range to differentiate 
the 16 MBTI types 

B Use of appropriate statistical criteria for demonstrating 
type differences | 

B Use of multiple dependent variables 

B Sample size requirements 


Multifaceted Dependent Variables Each of the four 
dichotomies on which the MBTI assessment tool is based 
is an example of what Carver has called multifaceted 
constructs, which he defines as “constructs that are 
composed of two or morc subordinate concepts, cach of 
which can be distinguished conceptually from the others 
and measured separately, despite being related to each other 
both logically and empirically" (Carver, 1989, p. 577). 
Jungs descriptions of the psychological functions and 
attitudes are a fundamental example of a multifaceted 
construct. And the research underlying ihe development of 
the subscales in the MBTI Stcp II and Step III scoring 
systems provides empirical evidence of the multifaceted 
nature of the preference scales. 

When choosing dependent variables to test type theory, 
therefore, it is important that whenever possible, broad or 


likewise multifaceted dependent variables be used. Unfor- 
tunately, many validation studies emphasize the measure- 
ment of singular, unidimensional concepts; consequently, 
MBTI scales, which are not homogeneous or unitary, are 
viewed as problematic. Although narrow or unitary mea- 
sures may, in some instances, or with some analvtic strate- 
gies, be appropriate criteria to validate the separate 
dichotomies of the MBTI, they may be misleading when 
considering interactions of preferences. When a complex, 
multifaceted independent variable is used to predict a 
homogeneous dependent variable, it is likely that only cer- 
tain facets of the complex variable will be related to the 
simple variable. If this is true, then little of the variance in 
the dependent measure will be explained. This problem is 
compounded when a four-way interaction is tested in 
ANOVA. It is unlikely that all of the many facets of the 
four complex variables interact with each other in such a 
way that their interaction will account for a significant 
percentage of the variance in a single, narrowly defined 
dependent measure. Narrow, unitary variables simply do 
not share enough content with MBTI scales to allow for 
the discovery of interactions among the four dichotomies. 
To find significant interactions, more complex and multi- 
faceted dependent variables must be used, but these are 
difficult to find since most instruments used to provide 
criterion variables are based on unitary variables devel- 
oped using traditional] psychometrics. 


Measurement Precision Measurement error always 
decreases one's ability to find meaningful differences 
between the groups of interest. The inverse of measurement 
error is precision. All measurement is conducted with some 
degree of error. Consequently, all observations based on 
measurements contain a degree of “slack” that yields a 
certain amount of uncertainty in the results. For example, 
when comparing the mean of two types on a dependent 
variable, there is always some error and therefore 
uncertainty as to what the “real” mean of each type is. The 
larger the standard error of the dependent variable, the 
tarther apart the group (type) means must be to justify 
a conclusion that the difference between the types is rcal 
and not just a result of chance variation. So when the 
criterion measures or dependent variables in a type 
validation study have a large standard error (are imprecise), 
it is more difficult to find theoretically predicted differences 
between types. A lot of “background noise” must be 
overcome before the real differences stand out. Large 
samples can help reduce standard errors, although in 
practice it is time-consuming and expensive to obtain 
sufficiently large samples of all 16 types to reduce standard 
errors significantly. 


Measurement Range Another problem in conducting type 
validation research results from using variables that yield 
only a narrow range of possible scores. This problem 


compounds the difficulties created by imprecise 
measurement. An extreme example would be to use as a 
criterion variable a single Likert scale (e.g., a simple 1 to 7 
rating scale). If this scale were to be used to compare the 
means ol the 16 types, the maximum possible separation 
between the means of the types would be less than 0.5 
point. If that were the case, to conclude that the 16 means 
were significantly different from one another the standard 
deviations (SDs) for each tvpe group would have to be less 
than 0.2. Given that SDs for Likert scales are typically 
greater than 1.0, it would be virtually impossible to 
conclude that the 16 types have scores on that variable that 
differ significantly from one another. 


Analytic Techniques for Demonstrating Type Differences 
One technique for examining type validity makes use of 
analvsis of variance (ANOVA), which involves dividing up 
the variance in a dependent variable and finding out how 
much of it can be explained by the effects of the in- 
dependent variables. In these analyses, preferences or 
combinations of preferences are the independent variables, 
and some other variable is the dependent variable whose 
variance is being partitioned. After all of variance in the 
dependent variable that is attributable to the separate 
independent variables has been identified, the remaining 
variance is then examined io determine how much of it can 
be explained by interactions among the independent 
variables. For example, if all four preferences were used as 
independent variables in an ANOVA, and the variance 
attributable to the main effects (the four preference scales) 
has been determined, the researcher might be interested in 
examining two-wav, three-way, or four-way interactions 
among the preferences, depending on the research question. 
If these interaction effects are indeed present, then they are 
evidence that the combinations of preferences are more 
than the sum of the parts. In MBTI research, such inter- 
actions are one way of validating the typological nature of 
the Indicator. 

From a typological perspective, the fundamental unit of 
analysis is the whole type. For this reason, researchers 
should consider using whole types as the independent vari- 
ables in their analyses. It is not necessary to use all 16 types: 
it depends on what hypothesis is being tested and whether 
all 16 types would be expected to differ on the specific 
dependent variable. Such analyses would provide better 
tests of the theory, regardless of the fact that types are iden- 
tified by the results on four separate dichotomies. There are 
precedents in other sciences, however, for identifying larger 
units of analysis by measuring several characteristics sepa- 
rately. For example, the natural sciences all identify species 
(1.e., categories) by taking separate measurements or obser- 
vations on different variables. The measurement of types by 
separately seoring the four MBTI dichotomies is a direct 
parallel to how species are identified in biology: 


Validity — 201 


Use of Multiple Dependent Variables Evidence of the 
validity of various preference combinations does not require 
that all 16 types be distinguishable from each other on a 
single dependent variable, on a single experimental task, or 
in a single social context. Failure to find significant 
differences among all I6 types on a given dependent 
variable does not disconfirm the MBTI as a typology. As the 
theory states, each type is quite similar to several others: 
Each type differs from four others by only one letter, from 
six others by just two letters, and from four others by three 
letters. Because of this overlap the 16 types should be 
distinctly different from each other in some ways but like 
one another in other ways. The parallel between comparing 
psychological types and comparing species in biology is 
again evident: Different species of wrens or finches may 
have similar weights and lengths of beaks yet exhibit 
distinctive variations in coloring. 

To validate type differences, therefore, it is often neces- 
sary to employ a set of dependent variables and to consider 
results across the entire set together. As Carlson and Levy 
point out, ^[S]ince any particular situation will invoke only 
a portion of the typological pattern, critical predictions 
should be based upon those components of the total type 
pattern which are intrinsically relevant to the problem at 
hand” (Carlson &amp; Levy, 1973, p. 563). In other words, 
because particular variables, tasks, and contexts tend to 
elicit behaviors that are relevant only to subsets of the four 
dichotomies, it is unlikely that analysis of a single variable, 
task, or context will reveal all possible differences among 
the 16 types. 


Sample Size Requirements The basic unit of analysis in 
validity research of whole types is the whole type. Because 
the 16 types are unequally distributed not only in 
oceupational groups but also in the population at large, 
finding samples that contain a sufficient number of the less 
frequent types can be difficult. And because the types of 
people are not known before the data are collected, it is 
often necessary to collect large numbers of cases in order to 
get enough people of the less frequent types. 

Even in studies that involve fewer than four-way interac- 
tions, it is still important to obtain enough people of each 
type whose preferences contain that interaction. If there are 
unequal numbers of types, then the findings may primarily 
reflect the characteristics of the most frequent type in the 
group. For example, in a study looking at two-way interac- 
tions of the E-1 and S-N scales, the E-I x S-N interaction 
includes four groups of types: EN, ES, IN, and IS. The EN 
group includes ENFP, ENTE ENFJ, and ENT]. If the sample 
of ENs contains 20 ENTPs and 25 ENFPs, but only + ENFJs 
and 5 ENTJs, then whatever conclusions are drawn about 
ENs will apply primarily to ENTPs and ENFPs. Also, when 
using ANOVA the interpretation of the interaction is more 
complicated and requires some additional assumptions if 
the groups are of unequal size. 


202 Research 


—— ——— —— — — 


Table 9.19 Summary of Significant Main Effects and Interactions Among 
the Four MBTI Dichotomies Against 73 Dependent Variables 


Number of 


Average Percentage of Range of Percentage of 





Effects Significant Results Average p-Value Variance Accounted For Variance Accounted For 
Main Effects 

E-I 28 .005 2.42 0.6—9.30 
S-N 36 .008 2.88 0.5-10.30 
T-F 93 .003 25S 0.7-9.70 
J-P l6 013 1.32 0.6—4.40 
2-Way Interactions 

E-] x S-N |I .020 :95 0.5— 1.80 
E-l x T-F 5 024 96 0.5-1.80 
E-I x J-P | -000 2.90 2.90 

S-N x T-F 3 .041 .67 0.5-0.8 
S-N x J-P 5 .017 70 0.6—0.90 
T-F x J-P 6 .025 .87 0.5-1.10 
3-Woy Interactions 

E- x S-N x T-F 3 Os 93 0.7-1.40 
E-I x S-N x |-P 4 .032 .83 0.5-1.10 
E- x T-F x J-P 3 .022 .80 0.6—1.00 
S-N x T-F x J-P 3 .028 '83 0.6-1.20 
4-Woy Interaction 

E-I x S-N x T-F x |-P 3 .009 1.40 0.7-2.20 


Note: See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: Nauonal sample. 


Studies of Preference Interactions 


Despite the difficulties described above, analysis of national 
sample data (the characteristics of which are reported in 
Chapter 7) found evidence of interactions among all possi- 
ble combinations of the separate preferences. In addition to 
Form M, data were also collected on additional variables, 
including work preferences, job satisfaction, and values, all 
of which were measured with Likert scales. Because miss- 
ing data varied by dependent variable and respondent, sep- 
arate samples were drawn for the analysis of each depen- 
dent variable. For each of these variables, equal numbers of 
each type were randomly selected from the respondents 
who had answered that item. Because some data were miss- 
ing, these numbers ranged from 29 to 48 for each type. 
ANOVA was used to test for main effects of the four 
dichotomous preferences and for all two-way, three-way, 
and four-way interactions. 

Altogether, 73 dependent variables were tested. Table 
9.19 reports the number of times each of the main 
effects and interactions were found to be significant in 


this set of dependent variables. It also shows the average 
significance level for each effect, the average percent- 
age of variance accounted for, and the range of percentage 
of variance accounted for by each main and interaction 
effect. 

The findings reported in this table may be summarized 
and interpreted as follows: 


w Every possible interaction among the four MBTI 
dichotomies is significant in predicting some of the inde- 
pendent variables in this study. These various interac- 
tions among the dichotomies are one piece of evidence 
for a typology. 

m Among the variables tested in this study, the main effects 
are predictive of more variables and usually account for 
more variance than do the interactions. Fifty-nine of the 
study variables were predicted by one or more main 
effects, while 34 were predicted by one or more interac- 
tions. The percentage of variance accounted for ranged 
from 0.5% to 10.30% for main effects and from 0.5% to 
2.90% for the interactions. 





m The E-I x J-P interaction predicted the variance of only 
one of the variables analyzed. All other interactions pre- 
dicted variance for three or more variables. This is not 
surprising because according to type theory, the E-I x 
J-P interaction is the basis for identifying type dynamics 
groups for the four functions. Consequently, we would 
expect to find this interaction to be more predictive 
when tested within each function than when tested in a 
group of all 16 types. (See the section on type dynamics 
below for a test of within-function interactions of E-I 


and J-P.) 


The results of this study provide particularly convincing 
evidence that the four MBTI dichotomies cohere as type 
theory describes. Because there were equal numbers of the 
16 types in all of the ANOVA analyses, all of the interac- 
tions were statistically independent of the main effects due 
to the four separate dichotomies. No assumptions had to be 
made about which effects were primary and needed to be 
considered first. The finding that all possible interactions 
were predictive of at least some ol the dependent variables 
in these ANOVAs is clear evidence that the MBTI measures 
a typology and not just four separate traits. 


Studies of Type Dynamics Theory 


'alidation of type dynamies goes a step beyond asking 
whether whole types can be distinguished from one 
another. In studies of type dynamics, the focus is on deter- 
mining whether particular groups of types, defined by psy- 
chological type theory, differ in observable ways. Evidence 
for the validity of the MBTI as a measure of type dynamics 
would include results indicating that the status of the fune- 
tions (e.g., dominant Feeling versus auxiliary Feeling), the 
attitudes of the functions (e.g., introverted Sensing versus 
extraverted Sensing), or both (e.g., dominant introverted 
Intuition versus dominant extraverted Intuition) are dilfer- 
ent from each other. For example, we might wish to see 
how extraverted Thinking when it is dominant, as in ESTJs 
and ENT]s, differs from extraverted Thinking when it serves 
as the auxiliary function, as in ISTJs and INTJs. We might 
also seek to find differences between the dominant intro- 
verted Intuition of INFJs and INTJs and the dominant 
extraverted Intuition of ENFPs and ENTPs. 

To simplify discussion of these issues, a three-letter code 
has been constructed that can be used as a shorthand label 
for all possible combinations of types defined by dynamics 
theory. The first letter in the code designates the status of 
the function, the second the attitude in which the function 
is expressed, and the third the function being considered. 
Thus, when considering the function of Intuition, there are 
four type dynamics groups to compare with each other: 
dominant introverted Intuition (DIN); dominant extraverted 
Intuition (DEN); auxiliary introverted Intuition (AIN); and 
auxiliary cxtraverted Intuition (AEN). To find the type 
dynamics groups for the other functions, substitute that 


Validity 203 


function’s letter as the last letter in the three-letter codes for 
each type dynamic group. 


Three-letter descriptive code 


Ist letter = 2nd letter = Sore 3 S e 

Status Attitude Function 

D= dominant 1] = introverted S = Sensing 

A = auxiliary E = extraverted N = Intuition 
T = Thinking 
F = Feeling 


Other comparisons may involve only the dominant ver- 
sus the auxiliary. form of a function. This comparison 
would be used to determine whether the status of a func- 
tion explains a difference in behaviors or characteristics 
associated with certain types. For example, for Intuition the 
contrast would be between the DIN + DEN types and the 
AIN + AEN types. At other times, the comparison may 
involve only the two different attitudes of the functions to 
one another; this would be a test of whether attitude alone 
can explain differenees in behaviors or characteristics 
among certain types. With Intuition, for example, the con- 
trast would be between the DIN + AIN and the DEN + AEN 
types. Which comparisons are analyzed depends on what 
questions are being asked or what hypotheses about type 
dynamics are being tested. Table 9.18 shows the types com- 
posing each type dynamic group for the four functions. 

Among the earliest studies to examine differences 
between the dominant and auxiliary functions were those 
by Carlyn (1975), McCarley and Carskadon (1983), and 
Williams and Carskadon (1983). The strategy in all of these 
studies involved counting the number of people with 
higher seores on their dominant function than on their aux- 
iliary function. The thinking was that if the dominant func- 
tion was, as predicted, the most favored, most psychologi- 
cally salient, or most under conscious control, the score for 
that function should be higher than for the auxiliary func- 
tion. However, in all three studies only half or fewer of the 
people had higher scores for the dominant function than 
for the auxiliary function. 

Myers and MeCaulley (1985), using a large database 
(N = 43,063) of Forms F and G, found that in only about 
hall the cases were the scores on the dominant function 
higher than those on the auxiliary function. McCrae and 
Costa (1989), after standardizing the preferenee scores to 
adjust for the facet that the S-N continuous score had a 
greater range than the T-F continuous score, revealed, 
using a chi-square analysis of +56 cases, no signifteant asso- 
ciation between the largest preference score and the theo- 
retically predicted dominant function. Most recently, Murry, 
Magidson, and Markham (1997) attempted to find differ- 
ences between dominant and auxiliary functions. Scoring 
the MBTI using IRT, they compared mean preference 
scores of dominant and auxiliary types for each function. 
They believed IRT scoring would yield a more aecurate 


204 Research 


identification of type preferences. Despite the improvement 
in scoring, and despite their use of a more rigorous "hybrid" 
latent trait/latent class model, they were unable to find any 
support for making a distinction between any of the domi- 
nant and auxiliary functions. Although these findings 
appear to be contrary to the predictions of type theory, it is 
important to examine the hypotheses tesied in these studies 
and the assumptions that undcrlie the approaches taken by 
these authors to testing their hypotheses. 

First, all of the analyses described above either tacitly or 
explicitly assign unintended meaning to high or low prefer- 
cnce scorcs. Even the original hypothesis that drives these 
analyses—that the persons score on the dominant function 
should be higher than the score on the auxiliary function— 
is not consistent with current interpretations of the theory 
(Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994) and is therefore not a good test of 
type theory. The magnitude of the preference scores used in 
these studies does not indicate development, skill, aptitude, 
maturity, or excellence in the use of a function. (The same 
is true of the preference clarity indexes used in Form M.) 
Yet the meaning ascribed to thesc scores by the hypothesis 
and the analyses that derive from it ignores the categorical 
nature of the preference scales and assumes a quantitative 
linkage between the propertics measured by the MBTI and 
the scores used to identify type preferences. 

Second, the item responses that form the basis for classi- 
fying people into different preferences are designed to 
appeal to people of one preference or the other ona given 
scale. For example, the “S” response to an S-N item was 
written 10 appeal to all Sensing types. Measurement at this 
gross level of the overall preferences does not permit direct 
inferences about the dominant or auxiliary status of the 
functions based solely on preference scores. 





Quantitative interpretation of preference clarity indexes is 
not recommended for the Indicator. 





Third, by its very nature the dominant form of a function 
is presumed to be different from its auxiliary form. Myers 
method of identifying dominant versus auxiliary functions 
assumed an interaction between E-I and J-P dichotomies. 
The impact of this interaction shows up in its effect on the 
forms and attitudes of the Judging and Perceiving functions. 





Interactive effects of the preferences produce something 
above and beyond the effects of separate preferences. 





The characteristics of dominant introverted Feeling, for 
example, are different and separate from those facets of 
Feeling that are shared among all Feeling types. Few 
authors have spelled out such differences explicitly (an 
exception is Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994). This is one arca of type 
theory that is open for future development. Nevertheless, 
at present the theory presumes that such differences are 
real and can be observed. Studies that simply compare 


scores of the dominant and auxiliary functions ignore 
these differences. 

Fortunately, there are several ways in which differences 
between dominant and auxiliary forms of the functions can 
be observed that remain true to the theory. For example, 
observer ratings of dominant and auxiliary Intuitive types 
could be examined. Certain characteristics observed by the 
raters would be predicted 10 be more frequently associated 
with people whose Intuitiou was dominant as compared 
with those for whom Intuition was auxiliary. The dominant 
and auxiliary uses of the functions would be expected to 
differ in some, but not necessarily all, ways. Another 
approach might be to use ANOVA to compare thc mean 
scores of various groups who share the same function on 
measures of characteristics that are relevant to that func- 
tion. Such measures might include vocational interests, val- 
ues, and attitudes. One study employing each of these 
approaches to type dynamics is summarized below. 


Testing Type Dynamics with Observer Ratings Although 
Thorne and Gough (1991) did not explicitly test 
predictions derived from type dynamics, their data can be 
analyzed to provide some answers to questions about this 
aspect of type theory. Their studies involved having naive 
observers (i.e., the observers did not know the types of the 
people they were rating) rate Institute of Personality As- 
sessment and Research program participants on a variety of 
behavioral and psychological measures. The characteristics 
that the raters ascribed to people who use each function in 
its dominant and auxiliary forms can then be compared. 
Information is not available on all 16 types because 
Thorne and Gough had sufficient numbers for comparing 
only 10 types; the tests of type dynamics with respect to 
Sensing are not available in this data set for some analyses. 
For Thinking, Feeling, and Intuition, Table 9.20 compares 
the dominant and auxiliary forms of these functions. There 
arc four columns of data in the table. The numbers in each 
column were taken from the lists of the 10 *most" and 
“least” descriptive adjectives used by raters to describe 
malcs and females in the sample. In each column, the num- 
ber before the “/” is the number of adjectives that werc 
shared among types having the dominant and auxiliary 
forms of each function. This number is an indication of the 
degree to which raters saw the dominant and auxiliary types 
as similar. The number after the “/” is the total number of 
adjectives that raters checked for the dominant and auxiliary 
types listed in each row of the table. The percentages are the 
percentages of adjectives that were common to the domi- 
nant and auxiliary types being compared in that cell of the 
table. These percentages range from 0.0 to 13.8, suggesting 
that independent observers, who did not know the types of 
the people they were describing, clearly did not sce much 
similarity between types having the dominant versus the 
auxiliary forms of Thinking, Feeling, or Intuition. 


Validity 205 
Table 9.20 Overlap in Number of Adjectives Ascribed to Types Having the Dominant Versus 
Auxiliary Forms of the Thinking, Feeling, and Intuitive Functions in the IPAR Data 
Functions Least Typical (Males) Most Typical (Males) Least Typical (Females) Most Typical (Females) 
Compared # SharedAdj/Total Ad;  &amp;SharedAdj/Tota! #Adj 4 SharedAdj/Total £Adj # Shared Adj/Total ££ Adj 
Dominant Thinking 
(INTP EST], ENT}) 
Versus 3/55 (5.4%) 3/56 (5.4%) 2/54 (3.7%) 6/56 (10.7%) 
Auxiliary Thinking 
(ENTP INTJ, ISTJ) 
Dominant Feeling 
(INFP, ENFJ) 
Versus 2/38 (5.3%) 2/37 (5.4%) 0/40 (0.0%) 1/39 (2.6%) 
Auxiliary Feeling 
(ENFP. INFJ) 
Dominant Intuition 
(INTJ, INF], ENTP. ENFP) 
Versus 9/65 (13.8%) 3/75 (4.0%) 5/72 (6.9%) 4/76 (5.3%) 


Auxiliary Intuition 
(ENT], ENF], INTP INFP) 





Note: The first number in each ratio i5 the number of adjectives that were shared among types having both the dominant and auxilary forms of the function 
The second number is the number of different adjectives that were used by raters to describe all of the types listed at the left of each row in the table 


Source: From Portraits of Type (pp 83-100), by A. Thorne and H Gough, 1991, Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1991 by Consulting Psychologists 


Press Used with permission 


Testing Type Dynamics Using ANOVA Another method 
lor testing hypotheses derived from type dynamics involves 
ANOVA. While log linear models are equally appropriate, if 
not more so, for some data sets, ANOVA is used here 
because it is likely to be more familiar to a broader spectrum 
of readers. If anything, ANOVA is apt to be less sensitive in 
detecting differences. So the results reported below 
probably understate the differences among type dynamics 
groups compared with what might have bcen found with 
other, less familiar, methods. 

In these analyses, the scores of people grouped accord- 
ing to type dynamics for each function should differ on 
variables that are relevant to their Judging (T-F) and Per- 
ceiving (S—N) preferences. For example, if the variable of 
interest is relevant to Thinking judgments, we would 
expect to find differences among the type dynamics groups 
lor Thinking. However, we would not necessarily expect to 
hind differences among the Sensing type dynamics groups 
on the same variables unless those variables were also rele- 
vant to the use ol Sensing. Given the multifaceted nature of 
type constructs discussed carlier, however, we should not 
expect that any single variable will show differences among 
all type dynamics groupings, cven for a single preference 
such as Thinking: The four Thinking groups, that is, domi- 
nant introverted Thinking (DIT), dominant extraverted 
Thinking (DET), auxiliary introverted Thinking (AIT), and 


auxiliary extraverted Thinking (AET), are both similar and 
different. The similarities will affect the scores just as much 
as the differences will. When a variable is mainly rclevant to 
the attitude in which Thinking is used, then we do not nec- 
essarily expect that DIT will differ from AIT, or DET from 
AET. However, across a diverse collection of variables relc- 
vant to the Thinking function, we do expect that all type 
dynamics groupings will differ in some respects on at least 
some of the variables. 

There are other problems in addition to sclecting thc 
proper variables becausc the requirements for validating the 
MBTI as a typology are more stringent than for trait-based 
personality instruments not based on a theory of interac- 
tions. Validating type dynamics using ANOVA with a given 
dependent variable requires the following two conditions: 
(a) that the E-I x J-P interaction term is significant and (b) 
that all of the type dynamics groups for cach function differ 
from one another. Both of these conditions are necessary; 
neither is sufficient by itself. 

Evidence lor the first condition will be immediately 
available from the ANOVA results. Evidence for the second 
condition requires that we demonstrate that the types hav- 
ing different forms and attitudes of the four functions can 
be distinguished from each other on the same variables for 
which the E-I x J-P interaction term was significant. For 
example, consider an analysis that compares people with 


206 Research 


dominant introverted Thinking (DIT; ISTP and INTP) with 
those with auxiliary extraverted Thinking (AET; ISTJ and 
INTJ) on a dependent variable called “importance of friend- 
ships." From a trait perspective, the only difference be- 
tween these types is their preference for Judging or Perceiv- 
ing. Consequently any differences observed between these 
groups should be only those attributable to the difference in 
the J-P preference. Thus in the ANOVA only the J-P main 
effeet would be significant. From a type perspective, how- 
ever, we seek evidence that the differences between the DIT 
and AET groups is greater than what can be explained by 
the J-P preference. If this is true, then in the ANOVA, the 
E-I x J-P interaction term should be significant among all 
Thinking types. When extended to all four functions and to 
all the type dynamics groups within each function, this 
analysis is a direct test of whether the MBTI accurately mea- 
sures the status and attitudes of the functions described by 
type dynamics. 

To test these conditions, the data from the national sam- 
ple were used. National sample data were also collected on 
work preferences, satisfaction, and values. Equal numbers 
of each type were randomly selected from the respondents 
who had answered each item used as a dependent variable. 
Because some people did not answer all of the non-MBTI 
questions, the number of people of each type ranged from 
29 to 48, depending on which dependent variable was used. 
This yielded between 58 and 96 people in each type dynam- 
ics group (dominant introverted, dominant extraverted, 
auxiliary introverted, and auxiliary extraverted) for each 
function, depending on the dependent variable. 

For each function, ANOVAs were conducted in two 
stages. In the first, the E-l and J-P dichotomies were the 
independent variables. For each function, the interaction 
between these preferences defines the four possible type 
dynamics groups (EJ, IJ, EP, and IP). The dependent vari 
ables were a series of items asking respondents about their 
satisfaction with various aspects of their work environ- 
ments, the importance to them of various life values, and 
their preference for working in various organizational 
structures. Responses to these items were on a four-point 
Likert scale ranging from “Very Satisfied” to “Very Dissatis- 
fied.” ANOVAs were run separately for each function on the 
entire item pool. Items for which the interaction term was 
significant were identified lor further analysis in the second 
ANOVA. 

The second analysis using ANOVAs used the type 
dynamics groups for each function as the independent vari- 
able with four levels. The items for which the interaetion 
terms in the first ANOVA were significant were used as 
dependent variables in this second phase. The ANOVAs 
were run separately for cach function. Following Toothaker 
(1991), the GH procedure was used for the multiple com- 
parisons among groups, and alpha was set at .OI. For each 
of the four functions there are four type dynamics groups. 
Using all possible combinations of these groups yields six 
possible comparisons among the type dynamics groups for 


each function. These comparisons are not independent 
because a given type dynamics group is involved in more 
than one comparison. Setting alpha lor each comparison at 
01 yielded an alpha for the familywise comparisons of .06 
for the entire set of comparisons on a given variable. 

Table 9.21 presents the results for the Thinking and 
Feeling groups. Comparisons above the diagonal are for the 
Thinking groups; thosc below are for the Feeling groups. 
Each cell in the table shows the variables on which the fol- 
lowing results occurred: (a) in stage one ol the analysis, the 
E-I x J-P interaction term was significant; and (b) in stage 
two of the analysis, the mean scores of the corresponding 
type dynamics groups were significantly different, at .01 or 
beyond. For example, the upper right-hand cell of the table 
lists the variable “friendships,” on which the AET (IST] and 
INTJ) and DIT (ISTP and INTP) groups had significantly 
different scores. Because the interaction term was signifi- 
cant on this variable, we may conclude that the difference 
between AET and DIT occurs as a result of the aspects of 
type that are more than the sum of the parts. Of six compar- 
isons among the Thinking type dvnamics groups, three 
were significant. 

The p-values for the mean differences are shown in paren- 
theses beside the item number in each cell. Dominant in- 
troverted Thinking types (ISTP and INTP), dominant 
extraverted Thinking types (ESTJ and ENTJ), and auxil- 
iary introverted Thinking types (ESTP and ENTP) all rated 
relationships and friendships as being more important in 
their lives than did auxiliary extraverted. Thinking types 
(IST) and INTJ). Dominant extraverted Thinking types also 
rated health as more important than did auxiliary extraverted 
Thinking types. 

Among Fecling groups, dominant extraverted Feeling 
types (ESFJ and ENFJ) reported a greater frequency of help- 
ing, teaching, or counscling activities in their current job 
compared with auxiliary extraverted Feeling types (ISF] 
and INF]). This was the only variable, and these were the 
only Feeling groups, that differed significantly on the items 
used in this study. 

Table 9.22 shows results of the same analyses for the 
Intuition and Sensing type dynamics groups. The cells 
above the diagonal compare the Sensing groups; those 
below compare the Intuition groups. One of six compar- 
isons was significant for Sensing type dynamics groups, 
while two of six were significant among Intuition type 
dynamics groups. Auxiliary mtroverted Intuitive types 
(ENT] and ENFJ) rated home and family as being more 
important in their lives than did the dominant introverted 
Intuitive types (INTJ and INE]) and the auxiliary extraverted 
Intuitive types (INTP and INFP). Auxiliary introverted Sens- 
ing types (ESTJ and ESFJ) were more satisfied with opportu- 
nities lor accomplishments at work than were the dominant 
introverted Sensing types (ISTJ and ISF]). 

Other results from this study shed additional light on the 
ways in which type dynamics groups are both similar and 
different. In the first stage there were generally more 


Validity 208 


Dependent Variables on WhichThinking and Feeling Type Dynamics Groups 


Differed Significantly and for Which the ANOVA Interaction Term Was Significant 


Table 9.21 
DIT DET 
ISTRINTP EST], ENT] 
DIF 
ISFP —— (None) 
INFP 
DEF 
ESF] (None) 
ENF] 
AIF 
ESFP (None) (None) 
ENFP 
AEF DEF &gt; AEF 
ISF) (None) Social 
INF) (.004) 
DIF DEF 
ISFP, INFP ESF], ENF] 


AIT AET 
ESTP, ENTP IST], INT] 
DIT &gt; AET DIT 
(None) Friendships GIE 
(.000) INTP 
DET &gt; AET DET 
(None) Health, friendships ESTI 
(.000 &amp; .007) ENT] 
AIT » AET AIT 
Friendships ESTP 
(.000) ENTP 
AET 
(None) E oa IST] 
INT] 
AIF AEF 
ESFE EINER ISFJ, INF] 


ee ee ee ee A ee a Oe ee LU ILLA ELI I. 


Note: Results for Ts are above the diagonal; results for Fs are below the diagonal. Numbers in ( ) are p-values for the multiple comparison test The type 
dynamics group to the left of the “&gt;” had the higher score, meaning that group was more satisfied with the aspects of work defined by the item or attached 


higher importance to it. 


DIT = dominant introverted Thinking; AIT = auxiliary introverted Thinking; DIF = dominant introverted Feeling; AIF = auxiliary introverted Feeling; 
DET = dominant extraverted Thinking; AET = auxiliary extraverted Thinking; DEF = dominant extraverted Feeling, AEF = auxiliary extraverted Feeling. 


Key to dependent variables (from the Form M research form): Social: Frequency of helping, teaching, or counseling others in current job; Health: Importance 
of health in your life; Friendships: Importance of relationships and fnendships in your hfe. 


See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample 


instances in which the main effects (due to the E-I and J-P 
dichotomies) were significant compared with the number 
of significant interactions (E-I x J-P). Of the five variables 
showing significant interaction effects, four also had signif- 
cant main effects due to E-l, J-P, or both. This pattern of 
results tells us that (1) sometimes the differences among 
type dynamics groups are mainly due to E-l or J-P differ- 
ences; (2) sometimes the differences among type dynamics 
groups are mainly due to interaction between E-I and J-P; 
and (3) sometimes the differences among type dynamics 
groups are due both to the effects of single preferences and 
to the interaction of those preferences. 

In the dependent variables examined in this study, the 
variance explained ranged from 1.1% to 3.3% for the inter- 
actions and from 1.0% to 13.4% for the main effeets. While 
none of these percentages is very high, it is important to 
remember that only a limited set of type preferences and 
interactions was examined in this study of type dynamics. 
The single dichotomies were predictive for a greater num- 
ber of dependent variables in this study. However, based on 
one study it is not possible to determine whether this find- 
ing is because single preferences are predictive of a greater 
variety of behaviors than are interactions or whether this 


study did not include enough of the variables for which the 
interactions arc predictive. 

Table 9.21 and Table 9.22 show that, for the Thinking- 
Feeling and Sensing-Intuition dichotomies, respectively, 
there were one or more variahles for which the interaction 
term was significant and for which the mean scores of two 
or more of the type dynamics groups were also significantly 
different. However, in several cases the first stage ANOVA 
identified variables for which the E-I x J-P interaction was 
significant even though none of the group comparisons was 
significant. Table 9.23 shows the variables for which the 
E-I x J-P interaction term was significant in the first-stage 
ANOVAs for the Thinking and Feeling functions. In addi- 
tion, it shows which of these variables also had significant 
p-values for one or more of the multiple comparison tests 
that were run in the second-stage ANOVA. Table 9.24 shows 
the same results for the Sensing and Intuition functions. 
What these tables reveal is that for each of the four functions 
there are significant E-I x J-P interactions. That is, for each 
of the functions there are characteristics of the type dynam- 
ics groups that are more than the sum of the parts. 

These two tables, 9.23 and 9.24, also show that signifi- 
cant interactions do not necessarily mean that there are also 


208 Research 


Dependent Variables on Which Sensing and Intuition Type Dynamics Groups 


Differed Significantly and for Which the ANOVA Interaction Term Was Significant 





Table 9.22 
DIS DES 
IST), ISF) ESME ESER 
DIN 
INTJ -— - (None) 
INF} 
DEN 
ENFP (None) 
ENTP 
AIN AIN &gt; DIN 
ENT) Home &amp; Family (None) 
ENF] (.000) 
AEN 
INTP (None) (None) 
INFP 
DIN DEN 
INTJ, INF] ENFRENTP 








AIS AES 
ESTI. ESFI ISTP, ISFP 
AIS &gt; DIS DIS 
Accomplishment (None) IST) 
(.004) ISFJ 
DES 
(None) (None) ESTP 
ESFP 
AIS 
(None) ESTJ 
ESF] 
AIN &gt; AEN AES 
Home &amp; Family —— 0 ISTE 
(.002) ISFP 
AIN AEN 
ENT], ENF) INTRINFP 


Note: Results for Ss are above the diagonal; results for Ns are below the diagonal. Numbers in ( ) are p-values for the multiple comparison test. The type 
dynamics group to the left of the “&gt;” had the higher score, meaning that group was more satisfied with the aspects of work defined by the item or attached 


higher importance to it. 


DIS = dominant introverted Sensing; AIS = auxiliary introverted Sensing; DIN = dominant introverted Intuition; AIN = auxiliary introverted Intuition; 
DES = dominant extraverted Sensing; AES = auxiliary extraverted Sensing; DEN = dominant extraverted Intuition; AEN = auxiliary extraverted Intuition. 


Key to Dependent Variables (from the Form M research form): Home &amp; Family: Importance of home and family in your life; Accomplishment: Satisfaction 


with opportunities for accomplishments at work. 
See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: Nauional sample. 


significant differenecs between the mean seores of the type 
dynamics groups. In other words, interactions between the 
E-I and J-P dichotomies can be present even when the DIT, 
DET, AIT, and AET groups, for example, cannot be distin- 
guished by their scores on one of the dependent variables. 

Such a result is possible because the interaction term 
represents facets of type that transcend the characteristics 
described by separate dichotomies. When these “trans- 
dichotomous” facets are related to a dependent variable, the 
result is a statistically significant interaction term in the 
ANOVA. So when the comparison of mean seores among 
type dynamics groups shows no significant dilferenees, 
either the transdichotomous facets of type are similar 
within all of the type dynamics groups or they are different 
but have similar effects on the dependent variable. While 
there is no direct way of knowing which of these is the best 
explanation, extensive past research with type has sug- 
gested that where there are differences in type characteris- 
tics, there are different behaviors associated with those 
characteristics. Thus it seems likely that when the interac- 
tion terms are significant but the multiple comparisons are 
not, the transdichotomous facets of type represented by the 
interaction are in fact shared among the four type dynamies 
groups. 


This interpretation fits with both type theory and 
empirical observations of the 16 types. All of the Thinking 
types, for example, have some charaeteristics in common 
even though thev also differ in one or more of their other 
preferences. So at a minimum, what is common to all eight 
Thinking types (IST), INT}; ISTE INTB ESTEIEN EEr Sas 
ENTJ) involves the Thinking function. Yet type theory also 
says that these eight tvpes should differ in how their 
Thinking is expressed. Thus we should expect to find both 
commonalities and differences with respect to how these 
types express their Thinking preference. Because we are 
dealing with a typology, there is no theoretical reason to 
believe that these commonalities and differences should be 
attributed only to the separate dichotomies that are either 
shared or different in the eight Thinking types. In fact, pre- 
cisely because the MBTI measures a typology, we would 
expect that some transdichotomous facets of the Thinking 
function would be shared among the eight Thinking types 
and some would not. Table 9.21 and Table 9.23, then, show 
us results that are quite consistent with type theory in this 
respect. 

Other results of this study demonstrate both a statisti- 
cally significant interaction term in the first-stage ANOVA 
and significant differences among the type dynamics groups 





Table 9.23 Dependent Variables for Which 
the E~I x J-P Interaction Was 
Significant in Thinking and 
Feeling Functions 


Significant Interactions for 
Thinking Type Dynamics Groups 











p-Value of 
Variable Interaction Term 
Satisfaction with opportunities for learning at work .022 
Frequency of helping, teaching, or counseling others 
in current job .026 
Like working in organizations that have a variety 
of tasks .038 
Importance of health in life .040* 
Importance of relationships and friendships in life .020* 

Significant Interactions for 
Feeling Type Dynamics Groups 

p-Value of 
Variable Interaction Term 
Frequency of helping, teaching or counseling others 
in current job .002* 


a ee ee ee o — em 8-72 07 73] 
Note: * Variables for which one or more muluple comparison tests were 
significant at p &lt; 01. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source National sample. 


in ihe multiple comparison tests. This result suggests that 
the effects of dissimilar facets of type on the dependent vari- 
able are being observed within the groups that differ. The 
results for the variable “health” demonstrate this. The E-I x 
J-P interaction term was significant for Thinking types on 
this variable. The mean for AET (IST), INTJ) was 3.61, 
while the mean for DET (ESTJ, ENTJ) was 3.83. The E-I 
main effect was significant, but because this effect is sepa- 
rate and independent from the significant interaction effect, 
it does not explain the difference in scores between thesc 
groups. From a strictly statistical viewpoint we conclude 
that there are some characteristics of these types beyond the 
E or I preferences that explain how much importance one 
attributes to health in one’s life. This, then, is an example of 
a wansdichotomous facet of type. 

These findings make sense from the theory because 
Myers used the J-P dichotomy to help identify or point to 
type dynamics groups. This is not to say that the E-I and J-P 
combinations bring about or cause type dynamics to appear. 
In this study the results are not interpreted as the E-I x J-P 
interaction causing the importance one attaches to health. 
Rather the interaction points to certain forms and attitudes 
of Thinking (as defined by type dynamics) that influence 
how important health is in one’s life. In this example, the 


Validity 209 








Table 9.24 Dependent Variables for Which 
the E-I x J-P Interaction Was 
Significant in Sensing and 
Intuition Functions 


Significant Interactions for 
Sensing Type Dynamics Groups 














p-Value of 
Variable Interaction Term 
Satisfaction with opportunities for promotion at 
work O16 
Satisfaction with opportunities for accomplishments 
at work .028* 
Frequency of helping, teaching, or counseling others 
in current job .005 

Significant Interactions for 
Intuition Type Dynamics Groups 

p-Value of 
Variable Interaction Term 
Frequency of artistic activities in current job .025 
Frequency of helping, teaching, or counseling others 
in current job .010 
Like to work in organizations that value independence 
and achievement .028* 


Note: * Variables for which one or more multiple comparison tests were 
significant al p &lt; .01. See Appendix for a description of the sample 


Source: National sample 


statistical interaction term corresponds to the characteris- 
tics of auxiliary extraverted Thinking and dominant ex- 
traverted Thinking. 

In conclusion, Myers explicitly asserted that combina- 
tions of E-I and J-P preferences would reflect differences in 
personality that could not be explained from knowing the 
preferences separately. And this is precisely what the results 
in Table 9.23 and Table 9.24 demonstrate. These outcomes 
thus serve as partial evidence for dynamic and typological 
aspects measured by the MBTI. 

The second requirement for validation of type dynamics 
was only partially met in this study. Of the six comparisons 
made for each function, three of the Thinking comparisons, 
one of the Sensing comparisons, two of the Intuition com- 
parisons, and one of the Feeling comparisons were signifi- 
cant. These results, which provide partial validation for the 
theory, may be a function of the dependent variables used in 
each analysis. Table 9.21, for example, reveals that two dif- 


ferent variables were necded to distinguish DET from AET, 


DIT from AFT, and AET from AIT. Significantly, different 
variables were required in order to distinguish the type 
dynamics groups for different functions. 

From a typological perspective, this is not surprising, 
since the MBTI attempts to measure qualitative dilferences in 


210 Research 


personality. Thus it is unlikely that any single variable would 
be able to capture all of the important differences among the 
types. As the results here demonstrate, a diverse set of vari- 
ables is required even to distinguish type dynamics groups 
for a single function. Future validation efforts may need to 
consider a greater variety of qualitatively different variables. 
Finding appropriate variables is difficult, however, because it 
demands a knowledge of what behaviors, values, attitudes, 
or observations are most rclevant to the transdichotomous 
aspects of type dynamics. It is much easier to identify appro- 
priate variables for validating single dichotomies than it is to 
identify variables that are relevant to the transdichotomous 
facets of type. It also may be necessary that the items, scales, 
or instruments used to measure these variables be multifac- 
eted rather than strongly unidimensional. 

Finally, the results shown in Table 9.21 and Table 9.22 
clearly confirm that the method used to identify type 
dynamics (i.e., the E-I x J-P interaction) corresponds to 
facets of type beyond the four simple dichotomies. These 
facets are present for all four functions. So while the results 
shown in the tables in this section substantiate the typologi- 
cal nature of the MBTI, future validation studics need to 
explore what additional variables might help fill the gaps. 


Studies of Whole Types 


Whole type validity involves many different questions that 
must be answered in ways that may be incompatible within 
the design of a single study. And some of these questions 
require large numbers of each type. So within the con- 
straints of time, money, staff, and the available pool of 
respondents, sometimes validity questions can be addressed 
only for certain subgroups of types. The study by Otis and 
Louks (1997) is one example. 

Research in this area seeks evidence that whole types can 
be distinguished from each other on the basis of unique 
bchaviors that are not predictable from knowing the four 
separate preferences composing them. 

For these reasons, validity is achieved cumulatively over 
many studies addressing different questions. 

There are significant complexities and resources needed 
to compare the 16 types in a single study. For this reason, 
researchers examining differences among whole types have 
often been unable to contrast all 16 types. 5mall sample 
sizes, limited hypotheses or research questions, and the dif- 
[crential attraction of types to field settings are constraints 
serving to limit the number of whole types that have been 
compared. In summary, in the studies below, only the 
results relevant to differences among whole type are empha- 
sized. Data and questions that address other issues are not 
discussed, even when they constituted the primary purpose 
of the study. 


Analysis of Type Distributions Type distributions are the 
basic method for presenting MBTI data on groups. A type 
table is sometimes seen as providing merely descriptive 


information, to be followed by more sophisticated analyses. 
On the contrary, type tables themselves provide evidence for 
construct validity. For example, if the type table for a given 
occupation has significantly more of the types predicted by 
theory to have interest in, and therefore be more likely to 
be members of, that occupation, then the type table 
contributes to construct validity. 

The method primarily used to analyze type distributions 
is the self-selection ratio type table (SRTT) analysis 
(McCaulley, 1985). This is followed by a chi-square test of 
the contingency table of interest. SRTT can be used to test 
how the frequency of a type in an occupation compares 
with the frequency of that type in a relevant base popula- 
tion; it provides an index of the magnitude ol over- or 
underrepresentation ol a given type or preference in a group 
or occupation. The numerator of the ratio is the percentage 
ol that type in the occupation; the denominator is the per- 
centage of that type in the base population. The ratio will be 
exactly 1.00 when the tvpe is found in an occupation in 
exactly the same proportion as it is found in the base popu- 
lation. It will be greater than 1.00 when that type is overrep- 
resented and less than 1.00 when that type is underrepre- 
sented. Thus a ratio of 2.00 indicates that about twice as 
many individuals of that type are found in the occupation 
as would be expected given the frequency of that type in the 
base population. Likewise, a ratio of 0.50 indicates that 
about half as many of that type are found in the occupation 
as would be expected by chance. 

To apply a statistical test to these data a contingency table 
is created and subjected to a chi-square test. Thus the proba- 
bility that the frequency of a given type, preference, or any 
group of preferences occurs by chance can be determined. 
There are two cautions when using this method, however. 
One is that in the traditional procedure, comparisons of all 
16 types and many different preferences are performed. 
With this many statistical tests, there is increased risk that 
some of the significant chi-square values will have occurred 
by chance. The second caution is that the chi-square statistic 
itself is very sensitive to sample size. With very large sam- 
ples, as is often the case with the base population, very 
small differences can be found to be statistically significant. 
Users of this technique should then ask whether the results 
are also practically significant. Examples of analyzing type 
tables using the SRTT method can be found in Chapters 11 
and 12 of this manual and in Hammer (19962). The Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator Atlas of Type Tables (Macdaid, McCaul- 
ley, &amp; Kainz, 1986) provides hundreds of type tables show- 
ing the distribution of types in various occupations. 

Another technique, log linear analysis, can also be used 
to analyze type distributions and draw inferences about 
construct validity. O'Shea and Mamchur (1989) demon- 
strate how log linear models can be analyzed to test the pre- 
dictions of type theory about occupational distributions. 
McCaulley, Macdaid, and Magidson (1997) have also 
applied log linear analysis to type distributions and offer a 


graphical display of the frequency of the types in a sample to 
the frequency in a base population. One of the advantages of 
the log linear method is that different models can be fit to the 
type distribution and then tested statistically. For example, a 
main effects model would predict that the distributions are a 
function of the four independent preference scales, with no 
interaction among them, while a “saturated” model attrib- 
utes the distributions to the 16 types, that is, to the interac- 
tion of the preferences. Another advantage is that when test- 
ing various models, the technique controls for the effects of 
the other type characteristics that are not being tested. 

Evidence to support the construct validity of the MBTI 
based on type table distributions is abundant and com- 
pelling, particularly in the area of occupational choice. The 
preponderance of data show that the distribution of types 
across occupations generally follows theoretical predic- 
tions. These findings have been observed (a) across sub- 
groups within an occupation, (b) across tasks within an 
organization, and (c) across occupations in a different cul- 
ture using a translation of the MBTI. 


Attraction and Satisfaction Among Couples 


Research Question This study by Marioles, Strickert, and 
Hammer (1996) addressed two questions. The first was 
whether married and engaged couples are more likely to be 
of the same or similar type, or whether they are more likely 
to be of opposite or dissimilar types. The second question 
asked whether there was any relationship between type and 
satisfaction with marital or premarital relationships. 


Sample and Methad The sample consisted of 271 couples 
being seen in conjoint therapy and 155 couples who were 
not in therapy. Both of these groups comprised married and 
premarital couples. Ages ranged from 17 to 79, with an aver- 
age of 36; duration of marriage ranged from 0 to 47 years, 
with a mean of 11 years. Fighty-three percent of the sample 
were Caucasian, 15% were Hispanic, and 2% were Black. 


Instruments Form J of the MBTI was used to determine type 
preferences as well as scores on the 27 subscales of the Type 
Differentiation Indicator. Relationship satisfaction was mea- 
sured using the items (rather than the four subscales) of the 
Dyadic Adjustment Scale (DAS). An attraction ratio (AR) 
was computed. Analogous to the selection ratio used in 
career counseling, the AR is the percentage of people of one 
type who marry a person of another type, divided by the per- 
centage of that other type in the base population. A high AR 
indicates that the pairing in question occurs more frequently 
than would be expected given the frequency of that other 
type in the base population. For example, it is relatively diffi- 
cult to marry an INFP male because there are so few of them 
in the population. Relationship satisfaction was measured 
hy an item on the TDI answer shect asking respondents to 
rate their satisfaction with their current relationship. 


Validity 211 


Table 9.25  Obliviousness Indexes for 
Men and Women 


Men Women Z: 
Type Index Rank 9 e» | Type Index —— Rank" y 
INTP — 33 ig. ENF] 13 = 
INF] 3l 2, ENFP [2 2 
ISFP 22 d INTJ || 3.5 
ESFP 2l 4 ENTP | A5 
ENT] 19 5 . ISFJ 10 9 
IST) l6 6 EST 2 6 
ISF 14 7 ESF} 8 7 
EST] [2 8 IST] 7 8 
INFP [I 23 ESFE 5 J 
ENTP B 2.5 ISFP 4 10 
ESF] 10 11.5 INF] 0 13.5 
ENF] 10 vis ISTP 0 13.5 
ESTP 9 13 INFP 0 [3:5 
ENFP 7 14 INTP 0 3:3 
INT] 0 15.5 ESR 0 13.5 
ISTH 0 15.5 ENT] 0 13.5 





Source’ From “Attraction, Satisfaction, and Psychological Types ol Couples,” by N S. 
Marnioles, D P Stnckert, and A L. Hammer, 1996, Journal of Psychological Type, 36, 
p 24. Copyright 1996 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with permission. 


Results With the exception of EST] and ESTP men, and to a 
lesser extent ISTJ men, the ARs for persons married to 
someone of the same type were higher for both sexes than 
were the ARs for persons married to the opposite type. The 
authors concluded there is little evidence that opposites 
attract or marry. There seemed to be no type-related pattern 
to satisfaction ratings. However, the discrepancies between 
partners' satisfaction ratings suggested the uscfulness of an 
index of satisfaction. This was computed as the difference 
between the percentage of a given type who say they are sat- 
ished with their relationship and the percentage of that 
same type who are in relationships where both partners are 
satisfied. Interviews with couples supported interpreting 
this ad hoc measure as an index of “obliviousness.” A high 
index value means there was a large percentage ol a given 
type who were satisfied with their relationship when their 
partner was not. 

The obliviousness indexes for each type by sex are shown 
in Table 9.25. Although not discussed here in the same way 
it is by the authors, this table provides an opportunity to 
look for evidence of whole type differences. In evaluating 
evidence for such differences there are two competing expla- 
nations for the rankings shown in the table. I the oblivious- 
ness index for each type is produced by type characteristics 
that are greater than the sum of the separate preferences, 
then the indexes and the type rankings should be dissimilar 


22 Research 








Table 9.26 Comparison of Types Most Similar Table 9.27 Comparison of Types Most Similar 
to Those Ranked Highest in to Those Ranked Lowest in 
Obliviousness for Men and Women Obliviousness for Men and Women 
Men Women Men Women 
Type Index Rank Type Index Rank Type Index Rank Type Index Rank 
INTP 33.0 1.0 ENF) 13.0 1.0 ISTP 0.0 15.5 ENT) 0.0 13.5 
INT] 0.0 5.5 ENFP 12.0 20 IST} 16.0 6.0 ENTP — I1. Dk 
INFP 11.0 9.5 ENT) 0.0 13.5 ISFP 22.0 30 ENF} 13.0 1.0 
ISTP 0.0 15.5 ESF 8.0 7.0 INTP 33.0 1.0 EST) 9.0 6.0 
ENTP 110 9.5 INFJ 0.0 13.5 ESTP 9.0 13.0 INT) 11.0 3.5 
Mean for Mean for Mean for Mean for 
4 Similar 4 Similar 4 Similar 4 Similar 
Types 5.5 12.5 Types 5.0 9.0 Types 20.0 5.7 Types 11.0 35 


Source. From "Auracnon, Satisfaction, and Psychological Types of Couples,” by N S$. 
Manoles, D. P Stickert, and A. L. Hammer. 1996, Journal of Psychological Type, 36, 
p.24 Copyright 1996 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with permission 


across types having similar preferences. On the other hand, 
if the obliviousness index for each type is produced only by 
the summative effects of the separate preferences of the 
types, then the indexes and the type rankings should be 
strongly similar across types having similar preferences. 

The simplest and clearest test of these two competing 
explanations is to consider the types that are ranked highest 
and lowest in obliviousness and compare them to similar 
types that differ by only one letter. Table 9.26 shows such 
data for the types ranked highest in obliviousness among 
men and women. Here we see INTPs are the most oblivious 
among men, with an index of 33 (rank of 1). The four most 
similar types are INTJ, INFP ISTP, and ENTP. However, 
their mean index is only 5.5; their mean rank is 12.5. 
Although it is normally meaningless to average ranks, in 
this case the mean rank is being used as an indicator of how 
close the four similar types are to the highest ranked type. 

Among women, ENFJs are the most oblivious, with an 
index of 13 and a rank of 1. The four most similar types are 
ENFP, ENT], ESFJ, and INFJ. ENFPs are ranked second and 
have an index that nearly matches that of ENFJs. But as the 
table shows, the remaining “similar” types are quite dissim- 
ilar in their indexes and their ranks. On average, the four 
most similar types have an index eight points lower than 
that of ENFJs and are half the list apart from ENF Js in their 
average rank. Table 9.27 shows the same kind of compar- 
isons for the types with the lowest obliviousness indexes. 
Here again, the differenees between the lowest-ranked types 
and the types most similar to them are quite evident. 


Summary and Interpretation In summary, then, the ranking 
patterns we see in these two tables do not appear to be asso- 


ciated with any of the separate type prelerences. With the 
one exception of ENFJ and ENFP women, the types having 


Source: From “Attracuon, Sausfacuon, and Psychological Types of Couples,” by N S. 
Manoles, D. P Strickert, and A. L. Hammer, 1996, Journal of Psychological Type. 36, 
p. 24 Copyright 1996 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with permission. 


the highest and lowest ranks do not share their places with 
the four types that are most similar to them. Their ranks, 
then, appear to derive from their unique typological charac- 
teristics, i.e., from characteristics that are not explainable by 
the summative effects of the separate preferences. 

“Obliviousness” in this study refers to the percentage of 
a given type who are satisfied with their relationship while 
their partner is not. In general, more men than women 
tended to indicate they were satisfied with their relation- 
ship when their partner was not. However, there were some 
major differences by type within the two sexes. 

Among men, INTPs and INFJs had the largest percentage 
who said they were satisfied when their partners were not. 
Among women, ENFJs and ENFPs were ranked highest in 
obliviousness. Yet these type rankings were virtually 
reversed among the sexes. Among women, INTPs and INFJs 
were among the least oblivious. Among men, ENFPs and 
ENFJs were located near the bottom of the obliviousness 
rankings. This pattern of results suggests that at least for 
INTPs and INFJs, and for ENFPs and ENFJs, there may be 
some major differences between men and women in their 
experience of intimate relationships. 

Moreover, the differences between the highest- (Table 
9.26) and lowest- (Table 9.27) ranked types for men and 
women provide additional evidence that the results are dis- 
playing typological effects. First, there appear to be basic sex 
differences in obliviousness. The mean index for women 
(averaged across the 16 types, not across the total number of 
women) is 5.6, while that for men is 14.1. This is consistent 
with Gilligans observation that women are more attentive to 
relationship issues than men are (Gilligan, 1982). Second, 
there are major differences between men and women as to 
where types are ranked. The two most oblivious types for 
men (INTP and INFJ) have indexes of 0 for women. The 


Validity 213 


Table 9.28 Differences Among DSM Diagnoses for the Introverted Types 


Axis Diagnosis ISTP INTP INFJ 
| Anxiety Disorder 
| Major Depression 
} PTSD 
li Antisocial 4 ar 
I} Avoidant 
li Dramatic - t 
I Obsessive - ~ 
li Dependent 
I! Odd 


ISFJ INFP INT) IST) ISFP 


+ 


Note: “+” indicates more likely to have the diagnosis and "—" indicates less likely to have the diagnosis than in 400 random samples. The Dramatic cluster 
includes diagnoses of borderline, cyclothymic, histriomc, and narcissistic personality disorders. The Odd cluster includes diagnoses of paranoid, schizoid, 


and schizotypal personality disorders. 


Source From "Rebelliousness and Psychological Distress in a Sample of Introverted Veterans," by G D Otis and] L Louks, 1997, Journal of Psychological Type, 40, p. 26 


Copynght 1997 by Journal of Psychological Type. Used with permission 


three highest-ranked types for women (ENFJ, ENFP, and 
INTJ) are ranked in the bottom third of the list for men. 

The sex differenee in the obliviousness indexes is quite 
strong and clear. However, it does not obscure the equally 
clear differences as to which types have the highest and 
lowest obliviousness indexes within each sex. The compati- 
bility between societal sex role expectations and type pref- 
erenees is a neglected area in type research. Nevertheless 
there are some relevant clues from at least one study that 
shed light on these results. Thorne and Gough (1991) 
found, for example, that independent observers’ naive rat- 
ings of subjects varied significantly by sex for some types. 
The differences were most dramatic where stereotypical sex 
role expectations were most at odds with the characteristics 
of that type. Their data showed that female INTPs were 
overwhelmingly deseribed in negative terms by observers 
who did not know the types of people they rated. Ratings of 
male INFPs and INFJs were also predominantly negative. 

Although other interpretations are possible, the results 
shown in Table 9.25 suggest that within the same type, sex 
differences exist in relational awareness. Furthermore, the 
results in Table 9.26 and in Table 9.27 suggest that these 
differences derive from characteristies of whole types rather 
than any additive combination of the separate preferences. 


Rebelliousness and Distress in Introverted Veterans 


Research Question Otis and Louks (1997) explored the 
relationship between psychological type and psychological 
dysfunction. 


Sample and Method The sample consisted of 185 male vet- 
erans who had been admitted to a Veterans Administration 
domiciliary and who had requested psychotherapy. The 
mean age of the study sample was 46.9 years and ages ranged 
from 30 to 70 years. The majority of the men had multiple 


DSM-III-R or DSM-IV Axis I diagnoses; 70% had a diagnosis 
of substance abuse or dependence. Data were collected at 
intake assessment, shortly after admission to the domiciliary, 
and during the early psychotherapy sessions. Except for 
ENFPs, the sample consisted primarily of Introverts. Only 
data for the 158 Introverts in the sample were analyzed. 


Instruments Data included the Shipley Institute of Living 
Seale, the original Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inven- 
tory ^ (MMPI), a clinical interview, and the MBTI Form F or 
G. A variety of demographic variables were obtained from 
ease records. 


Analysis The Wiggins Content Seales of the MMPI were fac- 
tor analyzed, with two factors emerging, which were named 
Subjeetive Distress and Rebelliousness. An ANOVA was per- 
formed on subjects’ scores on these factors, using age as a 
covariate and the four MBTI dichotomies as independent 
variables. A salienee analysis of the ease record variables was 
performed in whieh the mean, median, mode, and variance 
for each type were compared with those of a large number of 
random samples taken from the total pool of scores. Depend- 
ing on what proportion of the random sample scores is 
higher or lower than that for given types, the results for 
given types ean be interpreted as being significantly different 
from the scores of the other types in the sample. Due to small 
sample sizes, some DSM diagnostie categories were col- 
lapsed to yield larger groups. 


Results The ANOVA using MMPI factor scores as depen- 
dent variables showed significant main effects due to T-F 
and J-P and no significant interaction terms. Differences 
among the DSM diagnoses for the Introverted types compos- 
ing the sample are shown in Table 9.28. Among Axis I diag- 
noses, salienee analyses revealed that INFPs were most likely 
to have anxiety disorder, INTJs to exhibit major depression, 


214 Research 


Table 9.29 Differences Among Life History Variables for the Introverted Types 





Variable ISTP INTP INF) ISFj INFP INT] IST) ISFP 
Job Length = = t s 

Never Married + = — 
Number of Marriages * — 

Length of Marriage + 

Crime E 

Domestic Trouble * + = 
Note: “+” means that the type mean was greater than expected and “—” indicates that the type mean was lower than expected on the basis of random 


sampling distributions. 


Source’ Erom "Rebelliousness and Psychological Distress in a Sample of Introverted Veterans," by G. D. Ous and J L Louks, 1997, Journal of Psychological Type, 40, p. 26. 


Copyright 1997 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with permisston. 


and ISTPs to exhibit combat-related post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD). Among Axis II diagnoses, ITPs were most 
likely to display antisocial and avoidant personality disor- 
ders, and ISTJs were most likely to be designated obsessive- 
compulsive, while IFJs were most likely to be characterized 
as “dramatic.” 

Analysis of life history variables, shown in Table 9.29, 
found that ITPs were most likely to have been charged with 
a crime unrelated to substance abuse and to have discipli- 
nary problems at the domiciliary. ISTPs were most likely to 
have never married, while INTPs and ISFPs were least 
likely to have never married. INTPs tended to have a greater 
number of marriages than any other type, while ISTJs had 
the fewest. ISJs tended to stay in the same job longer than 
the other types, while INFJs and INTPs had the shortest 
mean time in their jobs. 


Summary and Interpretation Two things stand out clearly 
in this study. The first is that the ANOVA found the main 
effeets but none of the interactions to be significant. As 
mentioned above, ANOVA interaction terms alone are lim- 
ited in their ability to detect whole type differences. The 
second major outcome is the finding of distinct differences 
between whole types in terms of diagnoses and life history 
variables. A close look at Table 9.28 for diagnoses and Table 
9.29 for life history shows that differences between types 
are not just due to the summative effects of the separate 
preferences; otherwise, the patterns in the tables would be 
quite different. Among the patterns revealing whole type 
differences are the following: 


B INTPs and ISTPs were almost identical in their Axis II 
profiles and in their crime and domestic trouble histories. 
Taken by themselves, these findings could be interpreted 
as the separate effects of the preferences shared between 
INTPs and ISTPs: Introversion, Thinking, and Perceiving. 
However, none of the other Introverted, Thinking, or Per- 
ceiving types appear to share these effects. Consequently, 
the outcomes we see with INTPs and ISTPs seem to derive 
from the interactive combination of these preferences 
rather than their separate summative effects. It is the 


interactive combination of the Introverted, Thinking, 
and Perceiving preferences that creates the unique char- 
acteristics that are associated with dominant introverted 
Thinking. More importantly, these two types are opposite 
in “never married” status, and INTPs had the highest 
mean number of marriages of any of the types. One 
might argue that the S-N difference accounts for their 
opposite scores on “never married." But this interpreta- 
tion fails because one Sensing type, ISFP, was also least 
likely to be *never married." 


B INTJs were significantly more likely than any other type 


to be diagnosed with major depression, while INFPs 
were most likely to receive the diagnosis of anxiety dis- 
order. These differences are clearly specific to each of 
these types. None of the other types had significant pro- 
files involving these diagnoses. 


BM ISFJs and ISTJs had the two highest means on job length. 


Two Intuitive types, INFJ and INTP, had the lowest 
means on this variable. The difference is not just an S-N 
difference, however, because two other Intuitive types 
and two other Sensing types were not distinguished from 
each other on this measure. ISF]s and ISTJs are domi- 
nant introverted Sensing types. The joh length variable 
appears to be picking up a significant aspect of this par- 
ticular pattern of type dynamics. Yet these two types are 
clearly distinguished from each other by their profiles on 
Axis II diagnoses and their means on threc additional life 
history variables. 


The analyses in this study that relied on quantitative 
(numerically scored) data really did not reveal much about 
some of the truly profound differences in how people of dif- 
ferent types can exhibit dysfunctional behavior. The impor- 
tant. differences among the types were found mainly by 
looking at the diagnostic categories, which are qualitative 
measurements. Quantitative measures assume that what is 
important to know about the person is already contained in 
à structured measurement tool (such as the MMPI). Quali- 
tative measures, on the other hand, depend on a much more 
open-ended exploration and discovery process that takes 
place during an interview by a skilled clinician. The two 


Table 9.30 Number of "Most" and "Least" 
Descriptive Adjectives Uniquely 
Ascribed to Males of Each Type 
by IPAR Raters 


Most Least 
Descriptive Descriptive 
Total # 
Type # Unique Items # Unique Items Unique Items 
INFP 8 5 13 
INF} 9 5 14 
INTP 9 5 14 
INT] 9 4 13 
IST] 8 6 14 
ENFP 8 6 14 
ENF] 10 8 18 
ENTP [0 6 l6 
ENT) 7 8 I5 
EST] 8 8 l6 


Note: The maximum number of uuique adjective descriptors for each type 
1s 20. 


Source’ From Portraits of Type (pp. 83-100), by A. Thorne and H Gongh, 1991, Palo 
Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press Copyright 1991 by Consulting Psycholo- 
gists Press Used with permission. 


approaches yield very dilferent results, as seen by the fact 
that Otis and Louks qualitative descriptions (1997) describe 
differences between types that were not captured in analyses 
ol their quantitative data. The interested reader is referred to 
their paper for the rich details of their insights that cannot 
adequately be conveyed in a brief summary of their work. 


Unique Descriptions of Whole Types 


Research Question A study by Thorne and Gough (1991) 
was primarily exploratory and descriptive, with a focus on 
"the use of the MBTI in studying the interpersonal func- 
tioning of effective and creative people." 


Sample and Method The sample consisted of 614 people 
assessed in 12 dilferent assessment programs of one to threc 
days in length held at the Institute of Personality Assess- 
ment and Research (IPAR) between 1956 and 1984. The 
programs involved architects, student writers, research sci- 
entists, mathematicians, engineering students, medical 
school students, law school students, college seniors and 
sophomores, community residents, and Irish business exec- 
utives. Ratings of the participants in cach program were 
conducted by 62 women and 127 men ol the assessment 
stalf, using a variety of instruments. 


Instruments The MBTI Form F was used to identify type. 
Although data were collected using a large battery of instru- 
ments, only data from the Adjective Check List (ACL) are 
presented here. The ACL consists of 300 adjectives; raters 


Validity A15 


Table 9.31 Number of ‘Most’ and “Least” 
Descriptive Adjectives Uniquely 
Ascribed to Females of Each 
Type by IPAR Raters 
Most Least 
Descriptive Descriptive 
Total # 
Type # Unique Items # Unique Items Unique Items 
INFP 10 10 20 
INF} 4 9 I8 
INTP 10 9 19 
INTJ 10 8 I8 
IST) 4 9 13 
ENFP 8 7 15 
ENF} 9 8 17 
ENTP 8 6 14 
ENT] 8 6 14 
EST] 5 7 12 


Note: The maximum number of unique adjective descriptors lor each type 
1s 20. 


Source From Portraits of Type (pp. 83-100), by A. Thorne and 11 Gough, 1991, Palo 
Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press Copyright 1991 by Consulting Psycholo- 
gists Press. Used with permission 


checked each adjective that applied to the person they were 
assessing. Between 8 and 16 raters independently rated 
each participant using the ACL. Ratings for assessees were 
standardized to a base of 10 observers. Ratings for each per- 
son on each ACL item thus could range from 0 to 10, and 
interjudge reliability was .76. None of the raters knew the 
types ol the people they were assessing. Thus their ratings 
werc completely naive with respect to type. This is a crucial 
point for interpreting the findings summarized below. 


Analysis The authors present tables listing the 10 most and 
10 least common adjectives associated with the MBTI types. 
Because the emphasis in this review is on evidence for whole 
type differences, their data were reanalyzed. From the origi- 
nal tables listing the 10 most and least common adjectives 
associated with each type, the number of unique adjectives 
for each type has been counted. These counts are an indica- 
tor of the degree to which each type was seen as different bv 
independent observers who did not know the types of the 
people they were rating. The authors stated they had suffi- 
cient numbers to interpret the results for 10 of the 16 types. 
Data are thus presented for the following types: INFP, INFJ, 
INTP INTJ, IST], ENFP, ENF], ENTP ENT], and EST]. 


Results Thorne and Gough's data showed that, as we would 
expect, types sharing several preferences tended more often 
to be described with the same adjectives. Types sharing one 
or no preferences tended to be described with very few ol 
the same adjectives. Table 9.30 and Table 9.31 present the 
number of unique adjectives used by raters to describe 


216 Research 


males and females of the 10 types for which sufficient data 
were available. When examining the last column in Table 
9.30 and Table 9.31, it is important to remember that the 
maximum number of unique adjectives that can be associ- 
ated with each type in these tables is 20 because Thorne 
and Gough reported only the 10 most frequently checked 
adjectives for their “most descriptive" and "least deserip- 
tive" categories. 


Summary and Interpretation These results show that even 
types sharing several preferences are seen as noticeably dif- 
ferent by independent observers who do not know the 
types of the people they are describing. These data reveal 
quite pronounced differences between the types. The mini- 
mum number of unique descriptors lor a single type ranged 
from 12 for female ESTJs to a maximum of 20 for INFP 
females. The average number of unique descriptors for 
males was 14.7, and for females it was 16.0. 

These results are especially significant because they 
illustrate what is possible when measurement is not con- 
strained by using a narrow scale covering limited content. 
The ACL offers a great variety of qualitative descriptors that 
can be used to assess subtle differences in type behavior and 
is thus able to detect differences spanning an array of 
diverse qualities. This helps to put the differences between 
whole types into sharp relief. In fact, while the numbers of 
unique descriptors shown for each type in the tables is 
impressive, the differences in content of these unique adjec- 
tives is even more so. The reader is referred to Thorne and 
Gough (1991) for a listing of these adjectives for each type. 

When observers used the 300-word Adjective Check List 
to describe IPAR program participants, their ratings 
showed a keen sensitivity to type differences, even though 
they did not know the types of people they rated. For 
example, among males, ESTJs were described as practical, 
frivolous, opportunistic, boastful, tough, outgoing, smug, 
steady, self-confident, and unscrupulous. Male ENTJs were 
described as ambitious, planful, responsible, practical, 
thorough, cowardly, discreet, foresighted, industrious, and 
reliable. These are the two dominant extraverted Thinking 
types. In terms of single preferences, they differ only on the 
S-N dichotomy. Yet among the 10 adjectives most fre- 
quently used to describe both types, raters saw them as hav- 
ing onlv practicality in common. Male INTPs (dominant 
introverted Thinking) were seen as original, imaginative, 
complicated, hasty, rebellious, high-strung, individualistic, 
restless, self-centered, and temperamental. Male INTJs 
(auxiliary extraverted Thinking) were seen as formal, delib- 
erate, logical, retiring, serious, aloof, methodical, painstak- 
ing, thorough, and reserved. Virtually all other pairs of 
types were described in equally diverse terms. When stud- 
ies use Instruments with a sufficiently broad content, even 
raters naive to type can clearly see and describe differences 
among people of different types. 


Differences in Observed and Self-Reported 
Characteristics of Types 


Research Question Pearman and Fleenor (1996) designed a 
study to test whether the 16 types differ significantly from 
each other on observer ratings and self-report. 


Sample and Method The sample consisted of 2,398 man- 
agers and leaders who attended programs at the Center for 
Creative Leadership between 1985 and 1994. Using a large 
database, 150 persons of each type were randomly selected 
for analysis, although for two types, only 149 cases were 
available. Most of the sample were White males between 40 
and 55 years old. Their average tenure in a managerial or 
executive position was eight years. Most were United States 
citizens, and the majority were from the private economic 
sector. 


Instruments The two instruments used for testing type dif- 
ferences were the Leadership Style Indicator (LS1) and the 
California Psychological Inventory (CPI). The CPI yields 
scores on 20 standardized scales. The LSI contains 48 
adjectives used by observers to rate others. The individuals 
being rated also rated themselves on the same 48 adjectives 
in the LSI. 


Analysis The 20 scales of the CPI were analyzed as depen- 
dent variables in ANOVAs, with MBTI type as the indepen- 
dent variable. An ANOVA was also performed using the LSI 
scales as dependent variables. The Duncan Multiple Range 
lest was used post hoc to determine the ordering of types 
on the dependent variables. 


Results The ANOVAs by type were significant for all CPI 
scales and for 24 of the LSI scales. However, when type is 
used as the independent variable in an ANOVA, a signifi- 
cant effect tells us only that the mean for at least one type 
was significantly different from the means for one or more 
other types; a significant F-test does not necessarily indicate 
that the means of all 16 types differed from one another. 
Results of multiple comparison tests were not reported, so 
there is no way of knowing whether all 16 types were signif- 
icantly different from every other type on at least one of the 
CPI or LSI scales. Evidence of such differences is required 
for validation of whole types. 

However, the authors did report a hybrid analysis that 
incorporated both qualitative and quantitative differences. 
Thev compared all 16 types with respect to the scales on 
which the types scored highest. The result was a profile of 
the most important scales for each type that revealed how 
each type is characterized by the CPI or the LSI. The pro- 
files based on each instrument showed that the types all 
differed from one another. While this kind of analysis does 
not yield the precision of more sophisticated statistical 


techniques, its advantage is in avoiding a narrow focus on 
purely quantitative results that too often obscures impor- 
tant differences in the qualities that distinguish the 16 types. 
(The results of this study are discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 13 in this manual.) 


Summary and Interpretation The self-reported evaluations 
consistently varied by type. Furthermore, each type could 
be characterized by a combined CPI and LS! profile that 
matched the predictions of type theory and Myers’ type 
descriptions. For example, type theory predicts that ETs are 
likely to be more dominant in social behavior than any 
other type, and ENTJs had the highest score on dominance. 
The theory would also predict that ISFPs would score low- 
est on dominance, which they did. This study also found 
that all 16 types had scores in the normal t-score range on 
the CPI. From this the authors conclude that the MBTI 
measures normal and stable personality characteristics for 
16 types. Furthermore, within these normal score ranges, 
all 16 types can be distinguished from one another in ways 
predicted by type theory. 


Type and Time Orientation Harrison and Lawrence 
(1985) studied the time orientation of middle school 
students (N = 302). The students were asked to write 
scenarios about their personal futures, being free to decide 
how far ahead their description would extend. Based on 
previous theoretical work by Mann, Siegler, and Osmond 
(1968, 1971), the authors hypothesized that Intuitive types 
would be oriented toward the future; Thinking types would 
have a “linear” perspective incorporating the future, 
present, and past; Sensing types would be oriented toward 
the present; and Feeling types would focus more on the 
past. Using these hypotheses ahout time orientation, and 
considering the dominant and auxiliary status of the 
functions for each type, the authors hypothesized a rank 
ordering of types based on how long into the future the 
scenarios of each type were predicted to extend. 

Table 9.32 compares the observed with the predicted 
results. These findings are particularly impressive because 
the predicted rank ordering of types in the upper half of 
the table is based on typological criteria, which predicts a 
diflerent ordering than does the strictly linear or trait crite- 
ria used in the bottom half of the table. The differences 
between the two sets of predicted ranks illustrate that the 
typological predictions do not reflect a simple additive 
combination of the S-N and T-F dichotomies. The typolog- 
ical predictions Harrison and Lawrence made rank the 
types by their dominant functions in combination with the 
time orientations associated with those functions. This 
made maximum use of typological information and en- 
abled them to make more precise predictions about rank- 
ings of the types. 


Validity 217 


Table 9.32 Predicted and Observed Ranks 
of 16 Types by Mean Temporal 


Extension Scores 


Typological Predictions (r = .98)! 


Temporal Predicted Observed 
Type? Orientation? Rank Rank 
INT] Future &amp; Linear | | 
ENTP 2 2 
INF| Future &amp; Past 3 3 
ENFP 4 4.5 
INTP Future &amp; Linear 5 4.5 
ENT) 6 6 
INFP Future &amp; Past 7 7 
ENF} 8 9 
ISTP Present &amp; Linear 9 8 
EST) 10 10 
IST) Present &amp; Linear B 12 
ESTP 12 14 
ISF] Present &amp; Past 13 E 
ESFP 14 13 
ISFP Present &amp; Past 15 l6 
ESF} l6 15 

Trait/Linear Predictions (r = .88)! 

Temporal Predicted Observed 
Type? Orientation Rank? Rank 
INT] Future &amp; Linear 25 | 
ENTP 2.5 2 
INTP Future &amp; Linear 25 4.5 
ENT] 25 6 
INF) Future &amp; Past 6.5 3 
ENFP 6.5 45 
INFP Future &amp; Past 6.5 7 
ENFJ 6.5 9 
IST| Present &amp; Linear 10.5 2 
ESTP 10.5 14 
ISTP Present &amp; Linear 10.5 8 
EST] 10.5 10 
ISFJ Present &amp; Past 14.5 [| 
ESFP 14.5 [3 
ISFP Present &amp; Past 14.5 l6 
ESF| 14.5 [5 


Note: Spearman's rho; ^Dominant type function; Dominant time reference 
italicized, ‘The most important preference for time orientation ıs bold; 
?From the trait perspective, NT &gt; NF &gt; ST &gt; SE is the only ranking that 
can be made; consequently, tied ranks were assigned to the four types 
within each of these groups. 


Source From “Psychological Type and Time Orientation: Do Middle School 

Students Differ in Projecting Their Personal Futures?” by D. E Harrison and 
G. Lawrence, 1985, Journal of Psychological Type, 9, p 11 Copyright 1985 by 
Journal of Psychological Type Used with permission 


218 Research 





From the trait perspective only the additive effects of the 
preferences are important. The S-N dichotomy is most 
salient for time orientation, with Intuitive types predicted 
to have a longer frame of reference than Sensing types. The 
T-F dichotomy is second in importance, with Thinking 
types assumed to have a longer frame of reference than 
Fecling types. The summative predicted ordering in the sec- 
ond table is thercfore NT » NF » ST » SE From the trait per- 
spective, all Intuitive types are predicted to rank first, fol- 
lowed by all Sensing types. Within the Intuitive and Sensing 
types, the linear ordering would then rank Thinking types 
above Feeling types. While the authors did not discuss the 
rankings predicted by this kind of linear analysis, these 
rankings are shown in the second part of Table 9.32 for 
contrast with predictions made by type theory. As illus- 
trated, the linear model lumps the types together in groups 
of four because it considers only the S-N and T-F prefer- 
ences in determining ranks. 

The correlations of the trait predictions and the typologi- 
cal predictions with the obscrved rankings were .88 and .98, 
respectively. Both correlations are significant at p &lt; .OOl. 
Nevertheless, a visual comparison of the actual and prce- 
dicted rankings, as well as the difference in the sizes ol 
these coefficients, makes it clear that the typological predic- 
tions are much closer to the observed rankings than are the 
lincar predictions. This is because the linear model fails to 
account for characteristics that are important in under- 
standing a persons orientation to time. These characteris- 
ties are accounted for by type theory. More such studies that 
contrast the two eompeting explanations—type versus 
trait— would be invaluable. 


Correlations with Factor Scores Derived from Other 
Measures Mitchell (1981) reported on data from 475 bank 
cmployees at all levels of the organization in a study 
concerned with the social climate of the organization. Data 
included FIRO-B (Schutz, 1978), Strong-Campbell Interest 
Inventory (SCII) (Campbell &amp; Hansen, 1981), Edwards 
Personality Preference Schedule (EPPS) (Edwards, 1954), 
Supers Work Valucs Inventory (WVI) (Super, 1970), and 
data about job level, type of job, and performance. Factor 
analysis was uscd to derive factors from the items of FIRO-B, 
SCII, EPPS, and WVI. The author describes the factors as 
group phenomena that report value orientations in the 
group process and the experience of the organization. 
Factor scores were then created for each person in the 
sample, and MBTI dilferences on these factors were 
identified. Mitchell extended the analyses beyond 
correlations of the four MBTI preference scales to 
identification of specifie types and type groupings based on 
the FIRO-B, SCH, EPPS, and WVI. Analysis of variance was 
used to investigate type differences in factor scores. Note 
that the MBTI was not included in the original factor 
analyses. The sample was 55% E, 7096 S, 5796 T, and 68% J. 
Mitchell cautioned about generalizing from these data 


because of the relatively few Intuitive and Perceiving types. 
Preferences and types significantly associated with each 
factor include the following: 


g Factor 1: Happy family (harmonious interpersonal rcla- 
tionships with pleasant material surroundings). Highest 
types were ESFJ, ISFP, ISFJ, and ESFP Lowest type was 
EDME 

gm Factor 2: Varicty and challenge (latitude to work cre- 
atively on intellectually stimulating problems). Highest 
type was ENTP. Lowest types were ISE] and ISFP. 

g Factor 3: Achievement within the system (orientation 
toward climbing the corporate ladder). Highest type was 
ESTJ. Lowest types were ESFP, ESTP, and ENFP. (The 
highest six types are all Judging types; the lowest six are 
all Pereeiving types.) 

m Factor 4: Visible autonomy (free expression of views even 
when at odds with the social milieu). Highest types were 
ESTP, INTP and ENTP Lowest types were ISTJ and ISFJ. 

m Factor 5: Outgoing affiliation (satisfaction in being part 
of a group). Highest type was ESFJ. Lowest type was ISTP. 
(Top three types were all EFs; bottom three were all ITs.) 

m Factor 6: Business sociability (sociability with a pur- 
pose). Highest type was ESFJ. Lowest type was INI). 
(Top four types were all EJs; bottom three were all INs.) 

m Factor 7: Financial analysis (scientific and intellectual 
curiosity about economic and financial matters). Highest 
types were NT] types. Lowest types were STP types. 

m Factor 8: Nurturing affihation. Highest types were ENFJ 
and INFP Lowest type was ENT]. (Top seven types were 
Feeling types; bottom five were Thinking types.) 


In the Mitchell study, consistent with theoretical predie- 
tions, sociability and coneern for others were associated 
with Extraversion and Feeling; focus on achievement with 
Judging; and independence, autonomy, and intellectual 
achievement with Intuition and Perceiving. 


MBTI Research Resources 


Given space limitations, this manual does not review all of 
the thousands of research studies conducted with the 
MBTI. For those interested in additional information on the 
Mycrs-Briggs Type Indicator that is not covered in this man- 
ual, please see MBTI Applications: A Decade of Research on 
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (Hammer, 1996b) for a 
thorough summary of IO years of research in seven areas 
where the MBTI is Irequently used: career management and 
counseling; management and lcadership; teams; counseling 
and psychotherapy; education, learning styles and cognitive 
styles; multicultural applications; and health, stress, and cop- 
ing For those interested in more research on the use of the 
MBTI in organizations and in leadership in particular, see 


Developing Leaders: Research and Applications in Psychologi- 
cal Type and Leadership Development (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 
1997b). Another excellent source, of course, is the Journal 
of Psychological Type. The Center for Applications of Psy- 
chological Type (CAPT) maintains the Isabel Briggs Myers 
Memorial Library and can provide copies of some research 
articles. An extensive and regularly updated bibliography of 
MBTI research is also available from CAPT. 


Conclusion 


This chapter has examined two kinds of evidence for the 
validity of the MBTI—evidence for the validity of the four 
preference scales and evidence for the validity of whole 
types, including type dynamics. A number of exploratory 
lactor analyses of the MBTI scales have demonstrated very 
close correspondence with the hypothesized four-factor 
structure. More rigorous confirmatory factor analyses pro- 
vide even stronger support for the model. Correlations of 
the four preferences scales with a wide variety of scales 
from other instruments support the predictions of type the- 
ory regarding the meaning of and the behaviors believed to 
be associated with the four dichotomies. Evidence for the 
dichotomous nature of the scales was seen in plots of pref- 
erence scores against external variables. Analysis of these 
plots demonstrated that the only significant differences 
between successive groups of scores were exactly at the 
midpoint of the scales, which was also where the major 
changes in direction and slope was observed. An exciting 
new line of research was presented that uses topograhpic 


Validity 219 


mapping of brain activity patterns and provides strong evi- 
dence for the biological basis of the dichotomies. Other 
studies of behavioral differences, including studies of cre- 
ativity, differences in orientation to time, fantasy and 
imagery, desire for privacy, optimism, and anxiety also gen- 
erally support the theoretical definitions of the scales. 

For the first time, evidence has been accumulated to 
address the question of the validity of whole types and of 
type dynamics theory. Some of the research presented in this 
section is based on original analyses of the national sample 
data collected for this revision. This section reflects the 
emphasis throughout this manual on whole types and type 
dynamics. Evidence presented here on type distributions, 
attraction and satisfaction in couples, reactions to stress, and 
factor scores derived from other measures suggests that 
there are characteristics of whole types that are not pre- 
dictable from knowledge of the individual preferences alone 
or from simple additive models of the preferences. Descrip- 
tions of the types based on self-reports and on ratings by 
independent ohservers also show that each of the 16 types 
can be uniquely described with various sets of adjectives and 
descriptors. A reanalysis of a study of time orientation was 
also presented that directly compared type theory—based and 
trait theory-based predictions and showed that the type 
theory—based predictions were more accurate. 

The applications chapters that follow also present re- 
search that is relevant to the validity of the individual pref- 
erence scales and of whole types. Chapter + also contains 
evidence for the validity of the types. Hopefully, the research 
presented in this chapter and elsewhere in this manual on 
the validity of whole types and on type dynamics will en- 
courage other researchers to examine these questions. 












































d 
, í "Y +65 roe E 
% t re. ê IOS " i 2h eh I^ A " wo Hy Ké f i ` ART 
å » = E 8 P E ew j 
H $ i NT 54b i "E (4030 54 TE. TINIS M , 4 p^ "s RC) fau pE E j FI, 
` TU € m | ; i 14 NN -— sit c J e r99 d sero v ul (&gt; sages c enhonA dd $ 
JI) af Aelii " MALE E E E atl ot Caen 
&lt;6 m è 4 w 
A Dash gh X me 9 m ng zd : ong Weebl T ttr &lt;a 
7 - p^ Mer - t fe e Apodo cM 
AUI ‘ Pi vi won Qt Pe ru ^ TM 
i i 4 P “tz V ] a i b atije "AL Tirit Wi á ulus tet. duas Pr 
P bos da ws MODEL Am s 4 l HA 2d rr a, $ 
i t à ! Sur iom ; wt pw ™ Ts 4 ! » Va ua " 'idhu ibo te TP 
alt Las DET: AA uT Lg Af v al b A" E PLU 
t | ab i à Gas = E = 7 Orn m» "» » x. 
un , M d ) * n P Ü l M ive us { 7 7 vw 73 r* rv 
$^ » jv ^ 1720) 664117 n ~ ] ` f yi t d 1 A ^2 75207 M (ee) soothe d 
zi , 9S bn ry 1 cAN¢ s R2 ‘ LIP 2 pt cadi. Skin a a vue =al 


"^4 i] l " y HUTA ? a7 M) Pail Si LE $4 E P f } poe, d. ys d UN 


ier T orent xh 20 pe da Abe de eu — AN teenpem ob vem tiae (PAM 26 
ri) à Uu P bs ; E TET es tv: £ E w i As Då i a J bia? Mo Do ea AA 


s a T 
Ea noa de pl ada A EAT a pn rt do erre aE 
f W a l ] 
" ? ur F T - | i è TE b e "g BE 1*5 "7 B J e g TEM TE A Lhat 1A 
d e e d s E ~ 
) p t 9 5 8 n = A M adis ijs E © 3 ‘J "I E de nu 
" 4 ye a E yi E â í VA " "n uw » nil Aa n p CY ) dy "n a. 
he E i i g A , fa BE i T TA I &gt;A ! P^". f UL VICIS, + E uw p , ES i 
t r i - 9 1 E 
T. Rl ur Yr acere a A o&gt;?“ au à " AJ LIGA alata M 
"Jg - P LC Y i 
- VM 2 3 | &gt; 
I jt 1d send a ' ich wr ie we ~ T LU 


2 f * ə 4 è Í FTE. Í í 224 J . FTT Ji E t Wu eur dan A vu 
P é [ i | Pn x -A * 

02) 79 D è E y] 17 x : "i 1 Ad Im E NIU a uo CRDI T 

- a? ê ' a a 


- 9 LI P 
Ta 


fe Ti iiesearr a Aecogyrtes 


&gt; $45 (CR Ar v 
E e ow uui ag 
a m euntem «2a qu 
wu» ur cde du etm vnd 
x 4814 -^ pe. xà A voe Acum 
c.» (te mi Ag iyu 
T ^ a fans @ $7 aw dd mmm 
dnm | l . LET *3 fremit. obe 
“ite sd 


10 


The Uses of Type V 





he goal of making psychological type useful in peoples 

lives is realized in each of the five chapters in Part V 
The emphasis in all of the chapters is on what is practical and 
useful, backed up by theoretical consistency and available 
research evidence. Experienced users will note the addition of 
two new areas of application, organizations and multicultural 
settings, to those that appeared in the 1985 Manual. Practi- 
tioners whose focus is on one particular area of application 
will find helpfu! guidelines, many illustrations of ways to use 
the MBTI in their setting, and selected research evidence that 
supports such uses. 

Readers may note that these chapters sometimes include 
cross-references to other applications chapters or to chapters 
in earlier parts of the manual. Material written for a specific 
application area may be quite relevant in other areas as well. 
For example, information about learning styles in Chapter 
11, “Uses of Type in Education,” may be helpful to career 
counselors (Chapter 12) and management consultants 
(Chapter 13). Therefore, readers are encouraged to peruse all 
of the chapters in Part V. Even chapters that may appear from 
their title and overview to be less interesting or relevant may 


contain important and generalizable information of use in a 
variety of applications. 


222 The Uses of Type 


Chapter 10, “Uses of Type in Counseling and Psy- 
chotherapy, covers issues relevant to each of the di- 
chotomies as well as to using type dynamics and whole type 
in addressing the therapeutic process. As you read Chapter 
10, you will become aware of the following: 


B How neutral and positive type language can enhance 
psychotherapy 

W What different types expect from counseling and how to 
address those expectations 

B How different types are likely to benefit from different 
kinds of interventions to help them cope with stress 

B What issues are of concern in therapy for people of dif- 
ferent ages, for couples and families, and for those 
undergoing treatment for chemical dependency 


Chapter 11, “Uses of Type in Education,” encompasses 
all of the information available in this well-studied area 
of application. As you read Chapter 11, you will become 
aware of the following: 


B How the 16 types differ in their most effective ways of 
learning 

W What academic advantages and disadvantages are associ- 
ated with some type prelerences 

B How type preferences relate to preferred writing styles 

E How type is influential at all educational levels, from ele- 
mentary school through university 


Chapter 12, *Uses of Type in Career Counseling," pre- 
sents practical information and recent research relevant to 
using the MBTI in this important area. As you read this 
chapter, you will become aware of the following: 


E Which occupational trends distinguish the types 
S How self-selection ratio type table (SRTT) analysis con- 
tributes valuable information to career counselors 





W How to avoid using type and career information in a lim- 
iting and prescriptive way 

B How the same career can prove satisfying to each of the 
16 types 


Chapter 13, “Uses of Type in Organizations,” covers 
practical considerations and selected relevant research in 
this increasingly important area of application. As you read 
this chapter, you will become aware of the following: 


B How to introduce and use the dynamic and developmen- 
tal aspects of type in an organization 

B Practical ways of using the MBTI for problem solving, 
decision making, and conflict resolution 

B How the MBTI is effectively used in work teams 

B The value of applying a type perspective in leadership 
development 


Chapter 14, “Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings,” 
covers the newest area in which the MBTI is being applied. 
Multiple issues and a broad range of countries, cultures, 
and subcultures are included in this area. As a result of both 
its newness and its breadth, comparatively little definitive 
rescarch is currently available. As you read Chapter 14, you 
will become aware of the following: 


B When multicultural use of the MBTI is and is not 
appropriate 

B That people of the same type seem to have similar 
experiences, regardless of the culture in which they 
live 

@ That the expression of type preferences in different cul- 
tures may be markedly different 

B That occupational type tables in different cultures are 
remarkably similar 


Uses of Type in Counseling 1 0 


Advantages of a Typological 
Approach to Counseling 
and Psychotherapy 


Type and the Therapy/ 
Counseling Process 


Implications of Research on Health, 
Stress, and Coping with Stress 


Using Type with 
Different Age Groups 


Using Type with Couples 
Using Type with Families 


Using Type in Treatment 
for Chemical Dependency 


Summary of Clinical Research 
Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Counseling and 
Psychotherapy Settings 


Conclusion 


and Psychotherapy 


arl G. Jung based his theory of psychological types 

primarily on observations of his psychotherapy 
patients. He repeatedly observed individual differences 
that seemed to lie outside of the pathological domain; they 
were not easily attributable to neuroses, character disor- 
ders, or other diagnostic categories. Jung also observed 
these kinds of differences in philosophers, writers, poets, 
and scientists and found evidence for the universality 
of his tvpes across cultures, historical eras, and socio- 
economic situations. Jungs development and relinement 
of type theory are described in Chapter 3, and examples of 
his application of the type approach in psychotherapy 
appear throughout his many published works. Present- 
day practitioners who use Jungian typology in counseling 
and psychotherapy attest to its value, often seeing it as 


indispensable to their work with clients. 


223 


224 The Uses of Type 


Ihe development of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator per- 
sonality inventory made type theory more available to psy- 
chotherapists and counselors. Indeed, some of the earliest 
interest in the Indicator was on the part of clinical psy- 
chologists. In the 1960s, Mendelsohn and his associates 
(Mendelsohn, 1966; Mendelsohn &amp; Geller, 1963, 1965, 
1967, Mendelsohn &amp; Kirk, 1962) reported on students who 
sought counseling at the counseling center of the University 
of California, Berkeley. A 1979 review of the rescarch litera- 
ture on counseling applications ( Carskadon, 1979) reported 
more than 50 studies. The application of the MBTI to coun- 
seling and psychotherapy issues has continued to increase 
over the years. Recent clinical research literature is reviewed 
in Quenk and Quenk (1996). For a rcview of research on 
the related area of type influences on health, stress, and 
coping, see Shelton (1996). 

The goal of this chapter is to provide counselors and psy- 
chotherapists with a practical guide to using the MBII instru- 
ment in the broad variety of settings in which it is appropri- 
ate. The chapter is organized so that readers can readily find 
guidelines relevant to each counseling/psychotherapy issue 
or specific application. Where available, resources for addi- 
tional information are suggested. A brief summary of relevant 
clinical research is included in this chapter.! 


Advantages of a Typological 
Approach to Counseling 
and Psychotherapy 


The standard of “normality” against which behavior is 
judged tends to depend on the prevailing societal and pro- 
fessional view of mental health and psychological adapta- 
tion. Jungs observation of consistent, nonpathological indi- 
vidual dilferences in his patients casts doubt on such a 
normative view and provides the most compelling reason 
for taking type into account in psychotherapy and counsel- 
ing settings. À systematic conception of normal personality 
differences such as that afforded by psychological type 
enables mental health practitioners to discriminate between 
behaviors that are “normal” for one type but may signal dif- 
ficulties for another type. For example, we would expect an 
introverted child to enjoy spending a good deal of time 
alone but might be concerned when we see the same behav- 
ior in a typically active, people-oriented Extraverted child; 
an ISTJ who is habitually anxious and cautious about tak- 
ing on new projects would be consistent with her type, 
while the same behavior in an ENFP would be puzzling; the 
aggressive behaviors of an ENTJ and an ISFJ would likely 
have quite different dynamics and motivations. 
Understanding what is natural, comfortable, and valued 
and what is difficult, uncomfortable, and trivial for each of 
the 16 personality types enables therapists to assess clients 


from the standpoint of 16 different “norms” of human 
behavior. When therapists use this approach, clients are 
more likely to feel appreciated as individuals characterized 
by legitimate and predictable strengths and frailties. In 
avoiding comparing clients with a single norm of mental 
health, practitioners are less likely to make inappropriate 
diagnoses of pathological conditions. They are also less 
likely to miss subtle signs of psychological or emotional 
disturbance. For example, ESTJ and ENT] clients can often 
maintain outward composure and efficiency while experi- 
encing extreme internal confusion and distress. 

Additional advantages of a typological approach are 
directly related to using type-based rather than single- 
norm-based criteria in evaluating and treating clients. A 
typological approach helps therapists and counsclors in 
the following ways. 


Establishing Rapport 


Therapists who are aware of type differences listen for them, 
form tentative hypotheses, and can communicate under- 
standing and acceptance of a client quite early in the interac- 
tion. For example, many Introverted clients see their Intro- 
version as *a problem" or even as pathological. A therapist 
who hears this can clearly explain Introversion as a normal 
and adaptive energy preference, giving examples and asking 
the client questions that are likely to accurately reflect the 
clients feelings and experiences. A couple in marital coun- 
seling who in their report of their disagreements appear to 
differ in the Judging versus Perceiving attitude will both feel 
understood and affirmed when the counselor accurately 
describes the discomfort each experiences with the other's 
approach. Experienced practitioners can use such hypothe- 
ses about possible type characteristics with regard to all of 
the preferences, combinations of preferences, and dynamic 
whole types. Using type knowledge to aid in establishing 
rapport often occurs before the Indicator has been adminis- 
tered and interpreted, and a practitioner need not use type 
"language" to talk with clients about type differences. Once 
the MBTI has been administered and type verified by the 
client, practitioners can further enhance rapport through 
continued understanding of the clients type perspective. 


Promoting Therapist Neutrality 


Practitioners tend to listen to clients' presentation of them- 
selves and their difficulties from a more neutral standpoint 
when they are aware of the different meanings that may be 
associated with different type characteristics. They are less 
likely to interpret a clients style and behavior as disturbed or 
problematical before evaluating them in the context of the 
clients type. Counselors are also less likely to view the 
clients behavior using the bias of their own type. As Jung 
stated, “The greatest mistake an analyst can make is to 
assume that his patient has a psychology similar to his own" 
(1960, p. 259). 





Providing a Nonpathological Language 
for Discussing Problems 


The underlying premise of type is that each of the opposite 
type functions and attitudes is valid, necessary, and useful. 
The careful use of neutral and positive language in describing 
the opposite preferences is an effort to convey this notion. 
People new to type as well as experienced users can attest to 
the difficulty of avoiding biased and pejorative language in 
describing ones opposite type or ones less-preferred type 
characteristics. People often come to counseling because of a 
long period of disconfirmation by others, dissatisfaction 
with themselves, and a desire to reduce the distress that 
limits their lives. A positive way of describing difficulties 
that are associated with type differences can stimulate 
increased energy, optimism, and cooperation with the ther- 
apy process. This in turn can motivate a client with serious 
psychological problems to persist in therapy. In contrast, a 
therapeutic approach that sees the clients type preferences 
as weaknesses and differences from “normal” behavior can 
add to the discouragement and hopelessness that may have 
brought the person to seck help. 


Encouraging Change Based on 
Understanding of Differences 


People typically understand others from the point of view 
of their own type. It is natural for me to assume that my 
friends or colleagues motives for an action, what she means 
by her words, and what she wants me to do in response to 
her are the same as if I were performing that action, saying 
those words, or wanting a response. The reality of 16 differ- 
ent types makes such assumptions largely untenable. This 
is very likely reflected in the frequency with which clients 
express frustration and despair at their difficulties in living 
and working effectively with others. Clients who under- 
stand type differences gain a useful perspective on the 
meaning of others’ communications and behaviors. With 
continued guidance from the counselor, they can come 
closer to understanding the meaning of the words and 
actions of a person of a different type. For example, an ESF] 
client expressed anxiety and concern about losing his job 
because his quiet and dispassionate INTP supervisor fre- 
quently pointed out mistakes and gave praise sparingly. The 
client believed his supervisor was critical, disapproving, 
and dissatisfied with his performance. The counselor 
described and gave the rationale for the natural tendency of 
a dominant introverted Thinking type to focus on discrep- 
ancies rather than on what is going well. The counselor also 
pointed out that for an ESF] to be long on criticism and 
short on praise would indeed indicate disapproval and dis- 
satislaction with someones performance. This explanation 
of the natural differences between INTPs and ESFJs helped 
the client modify his expectations of his supervisor and 
made him more resilient and effective in his work situation. 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 225 


ne — 





Clients can also be helped to take type into account as a 
way of accepting and, if desirable, modifying their own 
behavior and communications. They may benefit by view- 
ing behaviors associated with their own and others' less- 
preferred sides as expected consequences of specializing in 
one of each pair of opposites. This can encourage them to 
appreciate rather than disparage differences. For example, 
an ISFJ planning a vacation with an ENFP spouse is more 
likely to compromise about including unscheduled activi- 
ties if her advance planning and attention to the details of 
the trip are appreciated by the ENFP as helpful rather than 
ridiculed as overly controlling and compulsive. 


Providing Clients with a Sense of Self-Worth 


Counselors have said that what they like most about type is 
that it gives clients a sense of worth and dignity concerning 
their own qualities. Clients can be assured at the beginning 
that finding out about type, one’s own and other peoples, is 
a releasing experience, not a restricting one as may have 
been feared. Finding out about type frees one to recognize 
one’s own natural bent and to trust one’s own potential for 
growth and excellence. There is no obligation or need to be 
like others, however admirable others may be in their re- 
spective ways. 

When they see a road toward effectiveness and satisfac- 
tion that they can travel by discovering and following their 
own intrinsically valuable preferences, clients often become 
more hopeful. As the model is explained, problems and lia- 
bilities can be seen as a neglect of less-preferred functions 
while more-preferred ones were being developed. The stage 
can be set for looking at the clients problems from the per- 
spective of gaining more effective command over both pre- 
ferred and nonpreferred functions and attitudes. For exam- 
ple, the Intuitive type can see that the dream of the future is 
valuable but that present realities may have been over- 
looked and need more attention. The Sensing type may see 
that the skills of dealing with present realities are valuable 
but that including Intuition will open up additional practi- 
cal options. 


Type and the Therapy/ 
Counseling Process 


Psychotherapy and counseling are complex endeavors, and 
many interacting factors influence the process for both prac- 
titioner and client. Issues such as presenting problems, set- 
ting where counseling occurs, referral source, allowable 
number of sessions, therapist theoretical orientation, age of 
client, and myriad other variables may be involved. The 
extent to which knowledge and use of the MBTI are appro- 
priate and helpful will vary in relation to this wide range of 
factors. Experienced therapists, however, report a continuing 


226 Tke Uses of Type 


process of discovering and capitalizing on the insights and 
richness type provides in their treatment of clients. 

This section is designed to provide both new and experi- 
enced counselors and psychotherapists with information 
that they can incorporate and use with clients. Typical 
counseling issues associated with the individual type prel- 
erences are presented first, followed by the more complex 
and very fruitful area of type dynamics and understanding 
of each of the 16 types. A third topic is effective communi- 
cation given the different communication and language 
styles of clients and therapists. 


Counseling Issues Related to Each 
of the Four Type Dichotomies 


The following descriptions are designed to alert counselors 
to issues frequently associated with each MBTI preference. 
The information provided can also be useful in helping 
clients appreciate and use both poles of the dichotomies. 
This can be especially important for clients whose use of a 
preferred attitude or function is one-sided or rigid. Such 
clients can be helped to see the preferences as tools. Part of 
the counselors task is helping the client recognize which 
tool is needed for a given situation. While it is certainly 
important to affirm the clients natural preferences, helping 
clients recognize circumstances more suitable to using their 
less-preferred attitudes and functions can be equally help- 
ful. The safety of the counseling situation can encourage 
effective use of possibly neglected poles of the dichotomies. 


Extraversion and Introversion (E-I) Issues related to the 
E-I dichotomy focus on the orientation of energy toward 
the outer world of people, things, and activities (E) or the 
world of concepts, ideas, and inner experiences (1). 


Extraversion Extraverts can, be expected to look outward 
belore they look inward for an explanation of the events 
that occur in their lives. They are more likely to initially 
blame others or life circumstances for difficulties than to 
cxamine their own contributions to problems. Extraverts 
also tend to 


B Gain insight more easily after having an experience. 
Therefore counseling sessions arc likely to be devoted to 
describing developments of the past week, seeking 
explanations of past events. 

B Become uncomfortable if the counselor is very quiet. 
They seek active interaction as a verification that they 
have been heard and may interpret silence and lack of 
active involvement of the therapist as disapproval and 
rejection. 

B Present such an active, competent face (especially E] 
types) that it is casy to miss signs of distress and lack of 
confidence. 

B Do à fair amount of talking as a way of arriving at the 
“point” of their communication. Counselors should 
view this not as trivial communication or an attempt to 





avoid important issues but rather as the natural *think- 
ing out loud" style of Extraverts. 


Some Extraverts seem to use their auxiliary function as 
well as their dominant function in the Extraverted attitude. 
This makes them appear to others as “extreme Extraverts” 
(see the discussion of auxiliary function issues later in this 
chapter). For Extraverts with this kind of imbalance in their 
use of energy, the developmental task is balancing their E 
with their I. They need to learn in small doses to reflect (use 
I) before acting and to gain greater comfort with solitude 
and their own company (I). Some Extraverts find they can 
add Introverted balance to their lives through formal medi- 
tation techniques or simply by making sure to include some 
solitary time in their daily activities. A major value of coun- 
seling is to help Extraverts slow down and consider their 
behavior before they act, and then consider it again after 
they act. 


Introversion Introverts are more likely to look to themselves 
first for causes of difficulties rather than to others and the 
cnvironment. They are therefore more intrapunitive than 
extrapunitivc. Introverted clients can be reassured that their 
instinct to first “blame” themselves for any difficulties is a 
natural and expected aspect of their Introverted prefcrence. 
Such a communication can discourage clients from assum- 
ing that their self-blaming tendency itself is a personal fail- 
ing. They will then be more able to consider other pcople 
and external circumstances as contributing to misunder- 
standing and life difficulties. Introverts also tend to 


@ Gain experience more easily after they have an internal 
conceptual or experiential framework. Therefore they 
bencfit from comments that help them clarify the con- 
cepts or linkages of past experiences that may be behind 
their own behavior. 

@ Want to understand what is behind other peoples behav- 
ior. Such knowledge makes the environment more 
understandable and therefore safer, so that they can 
attempt action. Dominant introverted Thinking clients 
(ISTP and INTP) in particular are often bewildered by 
others’ behavior and misinterpret or overinterpret its 
meaning. 

8 Need long pauses during sessions (which may cause dis- 
comfort to Extraverted counselors) while they clarify 
internally what has been said or gain the courage to con- 
fide something clse to the counselor. 

m Benefit from being encouraged to try new Extraverted 
activities. The therapist can reassure the client that first 
attempts may be experienced as awkward and uncom- 
fortable but greater case will come with practice. The 
goal is for the Introvert to develop a comfortable way of 
extraverting as an Introvert rather than extraverting like 
an Extravert. 


Some Introverted clients introvert both their dominant 
and auxiliary functions, making them appear as “extreme 
Introverts.” A developmental issue for them is to learn to 


use their auxiliary function in dealing with people and the 
Extraverted world. Counselors can encourage this balanc- 
ing development by suggesting tasks and activities that 
require the client to extravert the auxiliary and at which he 
or she is likely to succeed. Continued success often allows 
the “natural process" to come into play more actively and 
spontaneously. Introverts benefit from practicing actions 
and outward expression of opinions. 


Sensing and Intuition (S-N) Issues related to Sensing and 
Intuition involve the opposite ways clients take in informa- 
tion about the world and what they attend to in their imme- 
diate environment. 


Sensing In counseling with a Sensing type, issues should be 
discussed in specific and concrete terms, using frequent 
examples that are relevant to the clients life experience and 
circumstances. Sensing clients typically seek counseling for 
a specific, current problem and tend to be disinterested in a 
lengthy psychodynamic exploration of their lives. They ter- 
minate when that problem is resolved. They may return at 
some later time to obtain help with another specific issue. 
Sensing clients are likely to 


B See their view of the situation as the only possible one 
and therefore as permanent or a given. The counselor 
can broaden the clients perspective by describing practi- 
cal alternatives for the client to assess. 

B See the alternatives proposed as negative. When Intu- 
ition is the inferior function (15] and ESP types), this will 
be particularly true. The goal of providing positive possi- 
bilities is to teach the client that what is not presently 
known can be enhancing and not always threatening. 

BW Benefit from being taught to recognize and appreciate 
others’ intuitions and to put greater trust in their own 
Intuition when Sensing does not provide adequate 
answers. 


Therapeutic strategies that involve being active can be 
helpful for grounding Sensing types when their trust in and 
comfort with reality is shaken. Sensing types are often eager 
for and obtain great benefit from homework exercises that 
involve answering specific, factual questions, thinking about 
and assessing past experiences, and trying out new behav- 
iors. They may be skeptical and uncooperative when an 
Intuitive counselor suggests interventions that use fantasy 
and imaging techniques. In such situations, Sensing types 
who also prefer Feeling may be distressed at “disappointing” 
the counselor, which can exacerbate feelings of inadequacy. 


Intuition Intuitive type clients are likely to use more abstract 
or symbolic terminology and respond to symbolism and 
metaphorical allusions from the counselor. They may also 
make leaps from comments the counselor makes, at times 
"intuiting" something that is not what the counselor had in 
mind. Intuitive types tend to be attracted to open-ended 
and broad-ranging exploration of both their inner and outer 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 227 


lives and may wish to continue therapy after the initial 
issues have been resolved. As clients, intuitive types are 


likely to 


B Be so caught up in possibilities that they (1) overlook 
the facts and the limitations facts impose, (2) assume 
they already know all the facts, or (3) assume that facts 
are unimportant. A counselor may need 10 push Intu- 
itive clients 10 turn on their Sensing to assess the practi- 
cal steps needed to turn their possibilities into realities. 

@ Be independent and see many interesting connections in 
the process of discussing themselves. Counselors will do 
well to let them find their own solutions with a mini- 
mum of direction. 

B Focus on new possibilities and iake the position that 
there must be an answer if they look long enough. This 
stance can provide hope and optimism in treatment, but 
a counselor may need to ask whether the clients energy 
might be better spent on goals for which more immedi- 
ate possibilities offer needed solutions. 


Intuitive type clients enjoy and are often adept at inter- 
ventions that make use of fantasy and the exploration of 
psychological connections. They may be resistant to more 
factual and systematic approaches and disappointed in and 
critical of counselors who promote them. Such clients may 
assume that the counselor does not understand the com- 
plexity and uniqueness of the clients personality. 


Thinking and Feeling (T—F) Issues related to decision 
making and the general way of evaluating perceptions and 
communications involve the dilference between Thinking 
and Feeling. 


Thinking A Thinking type is naturally skeptical and critical 
and can be expected to be so in the counseling session. A 
counselor therefore should be prepared to back up his or 
her statements with evidence. Thinking types may also 


W Disregard what matters to them (Feeling issues) because 
“It isnt logical to care so much.” At some stage, it is 
important for them to accept and integrate their values 
and feelings as valid and deserving of respect. They often 
do this by including Feeling considerations into their 
logical, cause-and-effect analyses. 

B Not find it useful to be asked to describe feelings. It is 
also not appropriate to label Thinking types as “defen- 
sive” or "intellectualizing" when they have trouble 
putting feelings into words, or when their words for feel- 
ings sound stereotypical or analytical. 

8 Have issues about discomfort and a sense of inadequacy 
in social situations, as they tend to take longer than 
other types to develop comfortable social skills. This is 
particularly true for dominant introverted Thinking 
types (ISTP and INTP). Social skills training with easy 
exercises can be useful when the client sees the logic of 
learning these skills and when they will enable desired 
relationships or activities. 


228 The Uses of Type 


Clients who preter Thinking can benefit Irom achieving 
some comfortable ways of expressing approval and appreci- 
ation of others. The counselor should be careful not to 
expect the Thinking type to initially do this with finesse 
and skill and would do well to recommend low-key, non- 
emotive approaches. People who prefer Thinking usually 
have fewer words to describe and discriminate among their 
own feelings as well as to identify others’ expression ol feel- 
ing. During the process of counseling or psychotherapy, 
such clients can be helped to identify and make discrimina- 
tions in this sometimes puzzling area. 


Feeling Clients who prefer Feeling benefit from clarifying 
their values and discussing choices between short-term and 
long-term goals. They are likely to seek approval and affir- 
mation from the therapist and may be reluctant to state 
their needs and desires directly. In addition, they may 


B Ignore unpleasant facts that conflict with their values. 
Thev can profit from gentle confrontations with these 
discrepant facts. At times a counselors straightforward 
interpretations can be taken as harsh criticism. 

B Become negative and cynical when their goals and val- 
ues have been undermined or ignored. This is especially 
detrimental in types in which Fceling is dominant (EF) 
and IFP). Finding a new and caring connection or 
emphasizing good current relationships can be helpful 
in tempering a cynical attitude. 

WB Hesitate to state their wishes clearly and assume that 
other people ought to know their desires without being 
told. It is useful to point out that Thinking types may not 
know what matters to another person and it is unkind to 
make them guess when such information could be pro- 
vided in a straightforward manner. 


Clients who prefer Feeling, especially Feeling Judging 
types, derive genuine pleasure from helping others create 
and maintain harmony in their lives. At times, however, 
thev may devote so much energy to other people's needs 
that they have insufficient time for themselves. Care should 
be taken not to automatically *diagnose" their behavior as 
unhealthy or “codependent.” It can be a slow process to 
help Feeling types balance the nurturance that is intrinsic 
and satisfying for them against legitimate attention to their 
own desires. 


Judging and Perceiving (J-P) Judging and Perceiving are 
relevant when clients have concerns about organizing and 
controlling their lives or about adapting and being open to 
lile experiences. 


Judging People with a Judging preference bring issues relat- 
ing to control and authority into sessions. They may be 
uncomfortable with the therapy process if they perceive it 
as requiring them to give up control to the therapist. Judg- 
ing types, especially those who also prefer Sensing, are most 
comfortable when clear goals and timelines arc laid out at 


the outset of therapy. Clients who prefer Judging are also 
likely to 


B Find adapting to change stressful, especially when their 
previous strategies have proven ineffective. It can be help- 
ful to have Judging types let go of control for a limited time 
or in a limited arca. The client can “plan” to be flexible. 

B benefit from being taught strategies for using Perception 
to understand their own or other peoples behavior. Judg- 
ing clients can be taught to ask questions where they 
think they already have answers. For example, "My son is 
bad because he . . .” becomes “Why do you suppose he 
does...?" 

W Take the counselors expressed hypotheses, suggestions, 
and interpretations as final judgments rather than as the 
exploration of possibilities. Frequently emphasizing the 
tentative nature of the counselors statements is therefore 
important. 


The counselor can help Judging types avoid premature 
closure by asking them to think about other possibilities 
and facts that could be relevant and to define a period of 
time when they “decide not to decide.” Judging type clients 
often feel affirmed by the counselors recognition of their 
natural discomfort with lack of closure. They may then be 
more willing to stay open to their preferred form of percep- 
tion (Sensing or Intuition) and thus tolerate a delay in final 
decision making. 


Perceiving Types who have a Perceiving preference, espe- 
cially younger clients, often report problems related to dis- 
tractibility, procrastination, and difficulty meeting deadlines 
and organizing their time effectively. In addition, they may 


Bl See even modest structure as unduly restricting, especially 
if their preference for Perceiving is very clear and consis- 
tent. Behavior that can seem irresponsible to others may 
be seen by the client as a valuable exercise of freedom. 

B Benefit from considering the consequences of their 
approach. Thinking Perceiving clients can learn the use 
of Judging skills by considering the negative conse- 
quences of not coming to closure or being late. Feeling 
Perceiving clients can consider the harm they may be 
doing to others by not coming to closure. 

B Be able to moderate their approach by examining what 
happens when they have difficulties with decision mak- 
ing and asking themselves what facilitates or blocks 
decisions for them. A client can be taught time manage- 
ment or similar Judging skills, but it is usually more useful 
to mobilize the energy of the decision-making functions, 
Thinking and Feeling, to understand and overcome 
blocks to decision making. 


People who prefer to extravert the perceiving functions of 
Sensing or Intuition can be helped to come to closure by 
being asked to consider how likely it is that they will make 
the wrong decision given the amount of information they 
have. For Intuitive Perceiving types overwhelmed with too 
many options, practice in collecting facts will often eliminate 


most options as impractical and make their choices man- 
ageable. Help in breaking up a large project into smaller, 
morc managcable pieces can also be beneficial. 


Counseling Issues Related to 
Type Dynamics and Development 


Type theory leads us to expect greater comfort, confidence, 
and facility when individuals’ most conscious functions, the 
dominant and auxiliary, are directing their lives. We expect 
correspondingly greater discomfort, insecurity, and inepti- 
tude when the inexperienced, relatively unconscious tertiary 
and inferior functions are being used. This expected dynamic 
is predictable in a system that assumes specialization of 
opposite pairs of mental functions and attitudes. However, 
clients who are experiencing psychological and emotional 
distress may not conlorm to this hypothesized dynamic 
picture. The clients type development may be at issuc— 
there may be one or more ways in which the persons tvpe 
is undifferentiated—or there may be no clear and consistent 
preference for either pole of one or more of the dichotomies. 
For example, if neither Sensing nor Intuition is the habitual 
way of perceiving, the person may alternately attend to pres- 
ent data and shift to future possibilities in a haphazard man- 
ner; his or her resulting awareness of the world may diverge 
from that of others in an unpredictable way. This kind of lack 
ol dilferentiation may significantly contribute to the clients 
presenting complaints. For further discussion of undifferen- 
tiated functions, sce Quenk (198542). 

Alternatively (or in addition), nontypological factors may 
be the major source of the clients difficulties. We can expect 
general psychological impairment to have an impact on type 
functioning. Where general impairment seems to be re- 
flected or expressed in inadequate type functioning, the 
therapist may be able to address the issue from the neutral 
and affirming perspective of type dynamics. To expand on 
the example above of a person with an undifferentiated Per- 
ceiving function, such a client may be seen as somewhat 
eccentric and even paranoid because he or she tends to 
focus on a few concrete facts and move quickly to a global 
theory that connects those facts in an idiosyncratic way. The 
therapist can describe such “paranoia” to the client as a dif- 
hiculty in choosing which kind of perception is most appro- 
priate in a given situation, rather than as a serious "thought 
disorder.” Strategies to help the client notice and differenti- 
ate the two kinds of perception can then be adopted as a 
therapeutic approach. Thus, therapists and counselors who 
are alert to evidence of dynamic and devclopmental “signs” 
can capitalize on this knowledge in formulating and imple- 
menting individualized treatment of the client. 


Cautions in Making Inferences 
About Type Dynamics 
Therapists and counselors should bear in mind that type the- 


ory and the MBTI inventory address individual differences in 
normal personality functioning, not psychopathological or 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 229 


diagnostic categories as might be clicited in such instru- 
ments as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI). Isabel Myers observed that some people were able 
to use their type more effectively than others, and experi- 
ence certainly bears this out. Clients secking counscling 
and psychotherapy are likely to be Jess effective in their 
expression of their type. A knowledgeable practitioner can 
capitalize on this in treating them. However, the following 
cautions apply in assessing possible dynamic problems: 


m Dynamic and developmental issues can sometimes be 
hypothesized during the sessions devoted to explaining 
and verifying the clients type. However, case or difficulty 
in verifying a best-fit type are not by themselves indica- 
tive of the absence or presence of “type-relevant” prob- 
lems. A more fruitful approach is to attend to possible 
deviations from the "expected" dynamics of the client's 
verihed or hypothesized type. 

m Pcople often experience as “abnormal” the “normal” 
characteristics of types who are different from them- 
selves, especially when appraising theit opposite type. 
Counselors and therapists need to exercise particular 
vigilance in this regard. For example, an INT] therapist 
must remind herself that the gregariousness and focus 
on sensual pleasure of an ESFP are natural expressions 
of typc, not evidence of a narcissistic personality disor- 
der; an ENFP counselor should resist viewing his oppo- 
site IST] client as obsessive-compulsive. Similar cautions 
apply for all pairs of therapist and client types. 

m When a client is the same type as the therapist, the thera- 
pist may miss significant dynamic difficulties because 
what the client describes feels familiar and natural. The 
therapist may overlook evidence that the clients use of 
type is ineffective, perhaps viewing the difficulty as situ- 
ational and external. 


Identifying the Dynamics of Type Development 


The MBTI provides a therapeutic model that builds on nat- 
ural strengths before dealing with the weaknesses of less 
developed aspects of a clients typological makeup. Discov- 
ering the clients strengths and reinforcing them is therefore 
essential. The goal of this section is to help practitioners 
identify effective use of type as well as signs of possible 
dynamic and developmental difficulties. Where appropri- 
ate, strategies for treatment in dealing with these issues arc 
suggested. 


Assessment of the Dominant Function Since the 
dominant function in theory gives direction and is the most 
trustworthy, the counselor should listen for evidence that 
the dominant function is indeed trusted and giving 
directions. If the dominant function is Sensing, does the 
person have a good sense of reality, do practical things well, 
and enjoy the little pleasures of everyday life? 1f the 
dominant function is Intuition, do insights stand up under 
verification? If the dominant function is Feeling, are values 


230 The Uses of Type 


securely in place and ean the client live by his or her values 
comfortably? If the dominant function is Thinking, does the 
client see consequences clearly and take them into account 
when governing his or her behavior? The assumption is that 
relying on well-differentiated, trustworthy functions will 
lead to more positive outcomes and a greater sense ol 
autonomy for the individual. 

Serious consideration should be given to any dilficulties 
an individual is having in the aspects of life related to the 
dominant function. For example, impracticality in a Sens- 
ing type is more serious than impracticality in an Intuitive 
type since realism should be an essential characteristic of 
those who prefer Sensing perception. Habitual concern 
about hurting others’ feelings may be a sign of chronic 
stress in a Thinking type but not in a Feeling type. 


Assessment of the Auxiliary Function Many problems 
encountered in counseling situations are related to failure to 
develop the auxiliary function. Isabel Myers' original and 
revised type descriptions all discuss the consequences of 
failure to develop the auxiliary function, and sensitivity to 
these consequences should enter into the interpretive 
interviews and the conduct of therapy. The developed 
auxiliary function provides balance between Perception and 
Judgment and enables expression of both Extraversion and 
Introversion. Myers with Myers (1980/1995, p. 182) wrote, 
"In type theory balance does not mean equality of two func- 
tions or of two attitudes; instead, it means superior skill 
in one, supplemented by a helpful but not competitive 
skill in the other.” Some of the effects of failure to develop 
the auxiliary function are described below: 


B Extraverts who habitually extravert both their dominant 
and auxiliary functions will place so much reliance on 
the outer world that they will not be in touch with their 
own inner perception or judgment. For example, accord- 
ing to the theory of type dynamics an ENFP extraverts 
dominant Intuition and introverts auxiliary Feeling. If he 
extraverts both dominant Intuition and auxiliary Feeling, 
he may have little ability to judge himself and others from 
the standpoint of his own inner values. He may therefore 
rely primarily on others’ judgments and be easily influ- 
enced by outside circumstances. The therapist can 
encourage clients who extravert both conscious tune- 
tions to question the accuracy and relevance of relying on 
other peoples perception or judgment and learn to attend 
to and value their own "inner voice." Such clients may 
seek therapy during inidlife for issues related to habitual 
extraverting of the auxiliary function; they may report 
an emerging feeling that they lack inner substance and 
have no comfortable sense of themselves. 

B Introverts who habitually introvert both their dominant 
and auxiliary functions will be so caught up in their inner 
world that they will be ineffective in the outer world. 
These Introverts may demonstrate the characteristics 


usually ascribed to shyness; their one-sided Introversion 
may result in avoidance of the outer world rather than 
pleasure in the solitude of their own company. In con- 
trast, well-balanced Introverts relate to the outer world 
with relative comfort by exercising their auxiliary 
Extraverted function. One-sided Introversion can be 
particularly troublesome for young adults striving to 
succeed in work and in intimate relationships. Indeed, 
difficulties in these areas often bring such young people 
to seek help. 

Types with Sensing or Intuition dominant (JJ and EP 
types) ean be so caught up in experiencing life that they 
fail to direct their activities and come to closure. For 
example, according to theory an ISTJ has dominant 
Introverted Sensing and auxiliary Extraverted Thinking. 
If all or most of her energies are devoted to collecting 
and storing information, little or none is available to log- 
ically organize the information and develop structures 
for its use in the world. Without an Extraverted auxiliary 
function, an IJ might look like an exaggeration of a 
“pack rat,” continually collecting either eonerete objects 
(for an ISJ) or more and more theories (in the case of an 
INJ). An ESFP should theoretically balance dominant 
extraverted Sensing with auxiliary introverted Feeling. If 
energy is primarily devoted to stimulation of his five 
senses, there will be little way for him to seleet and 
repeat worthwhile experiences; he is likely to come 
across as shallow, insineere, and unreliable. In contrast, a 
more balanced ESFP will use a stable set of inner values 
to choose which sense experiences are most satisfying 
and meaningful. Similarly, a balanced ENTP or ENFP 
will use the Introverted Judging function to choose 
which exciting projects are worth pursuing and complet- 
ing, while a less balanced ENP is likely to flit [rom one 
exciting idea to another, accomplishing none of them. 
Types with Thinking or Feeling dominant (IP and EJ 
types) can be so caught up with controlling their worlds 
that they fail to collect data that would help them under- 
stand their experienees. Their judgments and decisions 
may therefore appear categorical and ill founded because 
they are in effect using only their dominant Judging func- 
tion without the balance that should be provided by gath- 
ering and considering relevant information (Perception). 
For example, an ENT] (dominant extraverted Thinking 
with auxiliary introverted Intuition) should, according to 
theory, be making judgments about relevant information 
acquired through Intuition. If little or no data are allowed 
in, his categorical and extreme judgments will likely 
come aeross as overcontrolling and domineering, and he 
will be seen as judgmental. Similarly, the dominant intro- 
verted Feeling of an ISFP, in the absence of auxiliary 
extraverted Sensing, may result in low self-esteem and 
hypersensitivity to criticism. The client draws negative, 
erroneous conclusions about her self-worth because ade- 
quate data are not available to her dominant Feeling 


Judgment. For further discussion of failure to develop the 
auxiliary function, see Quenk (1985b). 


Assessment of the Tertiary and Inferior Functions In 
theory, individuals are least effective and most vulnerable in 
the areas of their third and fourth functions, especially the 
fourth, or inferior, function. Counselors new to type theory 
may take the position that if clients have dominant Feeling, 
the most helpful counseling strategy is to help them develop 
their inferior Thinking. This is not the approach taken in 
developmental counseling, which builds on strengths to get 
to weakness. The client is encouraged to use the dominant 
and auxiliary functions to strengthen the less secure and 
more inexperienced tertiary and inferior functions. 

Isabel Myers (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; p. 64) described 
this in giving the rationale for differential development of 
type functions. She stated that 


[t]he kind of perception one prefers and the kind of judgment 
one prefers determine, between them, the directions in which 
one can develop most fully and effectively with the most satis- 
[action 10 oneself. . . . It is sometimes said that both kinds of 
perception and both kinds of judgment should be developed 
equally. The answer is that such a dead level of uniformity 
leaves one with no stable direction for ones life. Each of the 
four functions has its own objectives, its own fulfillments. The 
goals of the opposite functions are not compatible. Intuition 
does not want the same things as sensing. Feeling is not satis- 
fied by what satisfies thinking. One cannot direct ones life 
effectively toward a desired result until one’s hest-trusted kind 
of perception and best-trusted kind of judgment are agreed as 
to what is to be desired. 


Individuals are most willing to develop skills in using less- 
preferred functions when doing so is in the service of their 
dominant and auxiliary functions. This useful strategy for 
developing the less-preferred functions helps achieve goals 
set by the dominant and auxiliary functions. For example, an 
ENFP in theory would be caught up with new possibilities 
(dominant Intuition) for people (auxiliary Feeling). It is diffi- 
cult for an ENFP to deal with matters in a tough-minded 
fashion (tertiary Thinking) or with attention to practical 
details (inferior Sensing). If the ENFP is enthusiastic about a 
project that captures his Intuition and Fecling, Sensing and 
Thinking will be used in the service of Intuition and Feeling 
to accomplish the practical aspects of the project. Exercises 
ol this nature are valuable for teaching full use of perception 
and judgment; they are also a way to help clients identify 
which functions are easier or more difficult for them. 

Experience and maturity can lead to natural develop- 
ment of less-preferred functions. For example, an experi- 
enced INTP family practice physician may carefully collect 
facts and details (tertiary Sensing) and develop a successful 
"bedside manner" (inlerior Feeling) in seeing her patients 
because doing so serves her dominant Thinking and auxil- 
iary Intuition—which she relies on for arriving at a diagno- 
sis. Experience has also taught her that such an approach 
encourages patient compliance with treatment. 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 231 





Counselors can help clients make conscious use of ter- 
tiary and inferior functions through practice, not through 
understanding alone. The counselor can first help clients 
identify their less-preferred functions and become aware of 
their level of discomdort with or avoidance of them and 
then teach them to practice using the functions. Small tasks 
that may seem inconsequential to outsiders are better for 
learning to develop functions than are major life decisions. 
The process of choosing a meal in a restaurant is a better 
way to practice a new skill than the process of choosing a 
career. Small tasks are especially important for practicing 
less-preferred functions, since initial failures can be inter- 
esting experiments, not blows to self-esteem. Practical exer- 
cises that encourage gaining access to, experiencing, and 
developing each of the functions can be found in Myers and 
Kirby (1994). 


Eruptions of the Inferior Function During the course of 
psychotherapy clients are likely to report concern and 
distress about episodes of unfamiliar and disturbing 
thoughts, feelings, and actions. Such reports often conform 
to eruptions of their unconscious inferior functions. 
Unconscious energy is most likely to emerge when the 
clients level of conscious control of dominant and auxiliary 
functions is lowered. This shift of energy from conscious 
dominant to unconscious inferior often occurs in response 
to stress, fatigue, illness, and consciousness-lowering drugs 
such as alcohol. In terms of type dynamics, it puts the 
individual in the awkward and distressing position of trving 
to operate using the least experienced, most undeveloped, 
most unconscious, and largely ineffectual parts of his or her 
personality. When a therapist explains the role of the 
inferior function in normal type dynamics, and describes 
the predictable form of each inferior function, clients often 
experience a sense of relief. The predictability of their out- 
of-character behavior reassures them that they are not in 
danger of totally losing control of themselves and are not 
"crazy." The dynamics and descriptions of the eight inferior 
functions can be found in Quenk (1993, 1996). 

Because severe stress often pushes people to seek ther- 
apy, clients may not reveal their typical dominant and auxil- 
iary strengths during initial sessions. They may come across 
as poorly developed, exaggerated versions of their opposite 
type. Only when the severity of stress has diminished will 
the therapist recognize the clients more typical type func- 
tioning. The presence of unusual stress should be a clue to 
the practitioner that type may be distorted and that accurate 
assessment of type will be initially questionable, either 
through inquiry or through administration of the MBTI. 

This section has provided examples of some of the practi- 
cal applications of type dynamics. For insights into other rel- 
cvant dynamic issues related to counseling and psychother- 
apy, see Corlett and Millner (1993), Jones and Sherman 
(1997), Jung (1923/1971), McCaulley (1990b), Myers and 


232 The Uses of Type 


Kirby (1994), Provost (1993), Quenk (1989), Quenk, A. T. 
(1985), and Quenk and Quenk (1982). 


Capitalizing on Knowledge of Whole Type 


Counselors and psychotherapists who incorporate a typo- 
logical framework into their work can become sensitive to 
the nuances that differentiate each of the 16 types. They can 
weave this level of typological awareness into a broad range 
of therapeutic issues and across a wide spectrum of clients. 
As experience and knowledge grow, the existence of type 
differences serves as an implicit assumption that informs 
the therapists awareness and appreciation of the individual- 
ity of every client. The following comments are examples of 
just a few of the subtle qualities that emerge as distinctive 
therapeutic issues for some of the 16 types. 


BW INF] clients often admit to the therapist their fear that 
they are or could easily become "crazy." Their fear is a 
function of their uncanny ability to “read” the underly- 
ing emotions of the individuals and groups of people 
with whom they interact long before anyone else is 
aware that such emotions exist. 

BW ESFP clients acknowledge feeling “not quite grown up” 
in comparison with other people. This is understandable 
in light of their focus on sensual experience in the pres- 
ent and their often “fun-loving” approach to life, which 
does not fit well with the notion of responsibility and 
attention to long-range goals. 

B IST] clients, particularly men, tend to agree with a thera- 
pists suggestion that they express love for their children 
by providing financial security and ensuring that the 
children behave in an appropriate and responsible man- 
ner. These clients can become quite emotional at the 
therapists recognition that an ISTJs family may misin- 
terpret such an expression of love as a need to control 
and dominate the child. 

B ENTP clients may acknowledge with some discomfort 
that they have an underlying fear that they lack substance 
and seriousness and that their contributions are not really 
valued. They may therefore take particular pride in ac- 
complishments that call on less-preferred type character- 
istics, those that require slow, methodical, and detailed 
work over an extended period, rather than the more 
facile, innovative projects that come most easily to them. 

B INTP clients, especially women, often report an early 
awareness of being profoundly different from other chil- 
dren, leading to a hypersensitivity to signs of rejection 
and to painful memories of being ridiculed and scape- 
goated as “weird.” 

W EST} and ENT] clients may view their need for counsel- 
ing as a “defeat,” as personal failure to solve their own life 
problems. They may project their own sense of incompe- 
tence onto the therapist, which can emerge as a challeng- 
ing, confrontational approach to the counseling/therapy 
enterprise. 


Table 10.1 Indicative and Contraindicative 
Adjectives on the Waltz-Gough 
Efficacy Index 
Indicative Adjectives Contraindicative Adjectives 
active industrious anxious 
adaptable initiative apathetic 
alert persevering confused 
assertive planful dependent 
capable realistic dreamy 
clear-thinking reasonable immature 
confident reliable inhibited 
courageous resourceful irresponsible 
curious responsible meek 
determined self-confident quitting 
dominant stable self-pitying 
efficient versatile spineless 
enterprising submissive 
forceful weak 
independent withdrawn 





Source: From Portraits of Type (p. 69), by A. Thorne and H Gough, 1991, Palo Alto, 
CA Consulting Psychologists Press Copynght 1991 by Consulting Psychologists 
Press. Used with permission. 


Inferences about these and similar distinctive counseling 
issues for different types can be made from the research 
of Thorne and Gough (1991). They analyzed extensive 
observer ratings, self-ratings, and personality measures, such 
as the Adjective Check List and California Q-Sort, in relation to 
the personality types of a variety of subjects who partici- 
pated in intensive assessment sessions at the Institute for 
Personality Assessment and Research (IPAR) at the Univer- 
sity of California, Berkeley. Two measures of personal ad- 
jusunent, the Waltz-Gough Efficacy Index and the Marrot 
Psychological Soundness Index, were developed from avail- 
able data and examined in relation to whole types. Impor- 
tantly, neither the trained psychologists who observed and 
rated subjects nor the subjects themselves had any knowl- 
edge of psychological type. Therefore, the assessments of 
personal adjustment were made from a general normative 
view that reflects professional and socictal values and 
expectations. Observer ratings of gender appropriateness 
were also subject to general notions of adjustment. 

The efficacy measure was developed by Waltz and Gough 
(1984) using items from the Adjective Check List data pool. 
Subjects’ scores on efficacy were based on a difference mea- 
sure of pooled observer ratings on a set of indicative adjec- 
tives relative to contraindicative adjectives. Data for 374 
males and 249 females in the IPAR sample were analyzed. 
Table 10.1 lists indicative and contraindicative adjectives. 

Comparing the two lists of adjectives provides useful 
information about what qualities are valued as “efficacious” 








Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 233 


Table 10.2 Indicative and Contraindicative Q-Sort Items 
in the Marrot Psychological Soundness Index 


Indicative Items 


Is a genuinely dependable and responsible person 
Behaves in a giving way toward others 

Behaves in a sympathetic or considerate manner 
Is productive; gets things done 

Tends to arouse liking and acceptance in people 
Is calm, relaxed in manner 


Has warmth; has the capacity for close relationships; 
compassionate 


Has a clear-cut, internally consistent personality 


Is cheerful 


Contraindicative Items 


Feels a lack of personal meaning in life 
Is subtly negativistic; tends to undermine and obstruct or sabotage 
Has hostility toward others 


Has a brittle ego-defense system; has a small reserve of integration; 
would be disorganized and maladaptive when under stress or 
trauma 


Is basically distrustful of people in general; questions their motivations 
Is self-defeating 
Is basically anxious 


Feels cheated and victimized by life; self-pitying 


a UII Hume cra II TON e ECT, 1 75 SUUS GSDTRED EN Y IRR FE WELT OZ EC WCOEIEECI E UR." RECO SI D TUEET 7I HET —— ROI ECT E 
Source: From Portraits of Type (p 70), by A Thorne and H Gough, 1991, Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press Copynght 1991 hy Consulting Psychologists Press. 


Used with permission. 


in terms of psychological adjustment. Additionally, when 
we look through a “type lens,” it is evident that some types 
are more likely than others to demonstrate desirable char- 
acteristics. EJ types, for example, are readily characterized 
by many of the adjectives on the indicative list, such as 
active, assertive, confident, dominant, efficient, forceful, 
and responsible. IP types, in contrast, may be seen as lack- 
ing these qualities and more likely to demonstrate some 
contraindicative adjectives, such as anxious, inhibited, irre- 
sponsible, and withdrawn. 

The Marrot Psychological Soundness Index, developed in 
1981, is based on scoring of Q-sort formulations. Table 10.2 
shows the indicative and contraindicative items used to cre- 
ate this index. One can infer thal some types, for example, 
ESTJ or ESFJ, might be more likely to be seen as sound, 
while other types, for example INFP or INTP, could give the 
impression of having a deficit of soundness. 

Table 10.3 provides the rank order of the 16 types on 
these two measures of adjustment for males, and Table 10.4 
provides the same information for females. 

The rank orderings shown in Tables 10.3 and 10.4 are 
examples of the type and gender biases to which different 
types in our culture may be subject. Such cultural influ- 
ences may contribute to or exacerbate the psychological 
and emotional difficulties that lead people to seek counsel- 
ing and psychotherapy. Type and gender in combination 
can have marked effects on how people are assessed by both 
professional and lay observers. The two highest means for 
soundness for males are ESTJ and ESFJ; the lowest are 
INTP and INFP. For females, the highest soundness indexes 
are ENFJ and ESFJ, and the lowest are INTP and ESTP. Top 
male scores on efficacy are obtained by ESFP and EST]; bot- 
tom scorers are INFJ and INFP. For females, top elficacy 
scores are obtained by ESFJ and ENF], and low scorers are 


ESTP and ESFP (although sample sizes limit interpreta- 
tion). Being an ESJ rather than an IP is considered “posi- 
live” for males; being an EF] rather than an ITP is consid- 
ered "positive" for females. 


Client and Counselor Communication Styles 


The counseling session offers a laboratory for Isabel Myers’ 
prescription for successful comnunication. She wrote that 
“liln order to be successful, a communication needs to be 
listened to without impatience and understood. without 
hostility" (Myers with Myers, 1980/1995). 

Clients best understand counseling interventions 
couched in the their own type language. Sensing language 
is more concrete; Intuitive language is more abstract and 
symbolic. Thinking language is more objective and analyti- 
cal; Feeling language is more personal. With practice and 
an attentive ear, counselors can use words that help the 
client feel understood. When introducing a topic to a 
group, a reference to practical issues (Sensing), new possi- 
bilities (Intuition), long-range consequences (Thinking), 
and help for people (Feeling) will provide motivation for 
each of the functions. 

Sensing types, particularly ISJ types, often describe 
events with many circumstantial details. Intuitive coun- 
selors who immediately see what the client is leading up to 
can be tempted to interrupt. Interruptions can be seen by 
the client as a disconfirmation of the clients own style, a 
lack of understanding or respect. 

Intuitive type clients who often use abstract or symbolic 
terms can lead counselors to erroneously believe they 
understand the client. The assumption of understanding 
may rest on the different meanings the client and coun- 
selor give to the terms being used. The counselor should 


234 . The Uses of Type 


Table 10.3 Rank Order of Types on Two Measures of Adjustment: Males 





Soundness 

Type N M SD 
EST} 24 108.6 8.7 
ESF] 9 108.2 lala 
IST] 25 107.2 12.0 
ESFE 3 105.0 14.8 
ISTP 10 104.0 17.7 
ESTE 7 103.6 3:5 
ENF] l6 102.7 E59 
ISFJ 13 102.5 20.4 
ENFP 33 101.9 29 
ISFR 9 100.1 299 
ENTJ 3l 99.8 2419 
INT] 52 98.8 18.7 
INF] 24 97.5 72 
ENTP 23 96.0 18.4 
INTP 49 94.1 22.5 
INFP 33 90.8 23.9 

361 99.6 19.2 


Efficacy 

Type N M SD 
ESFP 5 320.7 22 
EST] 25 294.| 46.6 
ENF] 17 2/45 58. | 
ENT) 32 270.8 537 
ENTP 23 266.7 40.9 
ENFP 33 264.6 42.8 
ISF] 13 264.2 A2. 
INTP 49 256.9 44.7 
IST] 27 256.3 56.8 
INT] 53 255.8 52.8 
ESFJ 10 2558 61.3 
ISTP 10 247.9 62.8 
ISFP 9 245.3 78.1 
ESTE 8 242.5 46.6 
INF} 26 240.8 61.1 
INFP 36 299.5 60. | 

374 2594 53.7 


Source From Portraits of Type (p 145), by A Thorne and H Gough. 1991, Palo Alto, CA. Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1991 by Consulung Psychologists Press. 


Used with permission. 


investigate whether ihe meaning he or she attributes to these 
terms matches the meaning the client wishes to convey. 
Communication with Thinking types should begin with 
the rationale provided by the Thinking type client. New 
information from the counselor should be given in a logical, 
concise fashion with clear premises leading to conclusions. 
Communication with Fecling types should clearly 
acknowledge the areas of agreement before raising ques- 
tions or suggesting alternative courses of action. Feeling 
types, especially those in distress, are hypersensitive to 
indications that the counselor may not be on their side. 
Yeakley (1982, 1983) developed Communication Style 
Preferences for cach of the types, based on the similarity of 
functions that are Extraverted. These early studies by Yeak- 
ley indicated that high similarity in communication style is 
significantly associated. with effective communication in 
marriage, in manager-subordinate relationships in business, 
in the grades teachers give students, in sales to life insur- 
ance prospects, and in the types of parishioners ministers 
attract. Yeakley’s 1983 article described “styles of listening” 
that provide useful suggestions for counselors (p. 22): 
B Listening in the Sensing style means interpreting at a very 
practical level and asking questions such as 
What is the speaker saying? 


How should the words be decoded? 

How should the message be perceived? 

Listening in the Intuitive style means understanding ai a 
much deeper level and asking questions such as 

What does the speaker really mean? 

What are the assumptions underlying the message? 

What are the implications of the message? 

What are the possibilities suggested by the message? 
Listening in the Thinking style means analyzing and 
organizing while asking questions such as 

What is the structure of the message? 

What is the central idea? 

What are the main points? 

What are the subpoints? 

How are the various points related? 

Is there adequate evidence to justify cach claim? 

Is the reasoning logical? 

Are the claims true or false? 

Listening in the Feeling style means evaluating and 
appreciating while asking questions such as 

What arc the values suggested by the message? 

Should these values be accepted or rejected? 

How do I feel about the message? 

How do I feel about the speaker? 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 235 





Table 10.4 Rank Order of Types on Two Measures of Adjustment: Females 


Soundness 

Type N M SD 
ENF} | 116.2 9.8 
ESF) 9 1127 11.8 
ISFP 4 110.0 12.1 
ESFP | 105.0 0.0 
ISF] 12 104.5 17.2 
ENFP 29 103.9 17.0 
ENTP |9 103.6 12.2 
ENT) 14 10l.I 14.7 
IST] lO 101.0 13.7 
INFP 47 100.5 19.5 
EST] 12 299 22.2 
INTJ 24 98.7 15.0 
INF] I5 98.0 20.0 
ISTP 2 91.5 29:0 
INTP 30 86.7 18.9 
ESTEE 9 83.0 11.8 

248 100.5 17.3 





Efficacy 

Type N M SD 
ESF] p 292.0 47.4 
ENF] HI 291.8 32.7 
ENTP 19 286. | 45.3 
INT] 24 272.8 54.2 
ENT] 14 272.6 41.0 
ISTP 2 264.0 ge 
IST] 10 jae AG 44.5 
ENFP 29 249.6 60.2 
EST 12 246.8 47.6 
INFP 47 2243 597 
INTP 30 2322 47.3 
ISFJ 12 2271 38.4 
INF] 15 22E S17 
ISFP 4 2128 66.2 
ESTE | 199.0 0.0 
ESER | 193.0 0.0 

240 252.5 50.6 





Source: From Portraits of Type (p. 146), by A. Thorne and H Gough, 1991, Palo Alto, CA. Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1991 by Consulung Psychologists Press 


Used with permission. 


Implications of Research on Health, 
Stress, and Coping with Stress 


People often come for counseling and psychotherapy when 
they have difficulty coping with the stresses of everyday liv- 
ing and working, as well as in dealing with chronic ill- 
nesses. Does knowledge of the psychologieal type of a client 
help in understanding, assessing, and treating such stress- 
related complaints? It is reasonable 10 expect that different 
types will define, experience, and react to stress in type- 
consistent ways, may use different kinds of eoping strate- 
gies in dealing with life problems, and may find different 
environments more and less hospitable to their natural 
typological characteristics. The review of researeh on 
health, stress, and coping provided by Shelton (1996) sup- 
ports the differential experiences and responses of the I6 
types and groupings of types in these important areas. Rele- 
vant results from this review are summarized in the 
research tables included in Chapter 4. 

This section focuses specifically on research results 
obtained in studies of the 3,000 members of the national 
sample used to create MBTI Form M, and on recent research 
with a few other samples and measures that used Form M. 
The Appendix fully describes the samples used here. 


Among other questions, participants in the national 
sample were asked whether they had ever had heart disease 
or hvpertension, what they found stressful in life, what 
were their typical ways of coping with stress, and whether 
thev believed in a higher spiritual power. The several previ- 
ous studies that looked at tvpe and heart disease, as sum- 
marized by Shelton (1996), found that across studies, Intro- 
verts are more than one and one-half times as frequent in 
coronary heart disease (CHD) groups than would be 
expected relative to their proportion in Myers' high school 
sample.? (See 1985 Manual, pp. 50-51.) Dominant intro- 
verted Sensing types (ISTJ and ISFJ) appear two to three 
times more frequently as well. Sensing types in general were 
found to be overrepresented in CHD studies, and 5] types in 
particular were overrepresented. It is important to note that 
all of the studies previously reported used subjects who had 
been diagnosed with CHD and/or were in treatment pro- 
grams for their illness. Research with the national sample 
used self-report data from a representative sample that was 
not in any way selected for presence or absence of heart dis- 
ease or hypertension. In addition, analyses of these data 
partialed out age, which could have an effect on results. 

Table 10.5 shows the rank order of the 16 types as the 
percentage of each type who answered "Yes" to the question 
"Have you ever had heart disease or hypertension?" As 
shown, the four top-ranking types share a preference for both 


236 The Uses of Type 


Table 10.5 Rank Order of Types Who 
Answered “Yes” to Ever Having 
Heart Disease or Hypertension 


Type Percentage Type Percentage 
ISFP 27.4 EST] 9:4 
ISTP 202 INTP 18.2 
IST| 26.6 ENT] 17.0 
ISFJ 24.7 ESTP 15.5 
ESFJ 21.8 ENFP [54 
ESE 21.0 INTJ Fs, 
ENF) 20.7 INFP hy 
INF| 20.4 ENTP 10.7 


(Sita &gt; a — 01-03 "UD GR RES Eau Oe ee LE ee eo p qeu oes 
Note: N = 3,036. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source. National sample. 


Introversion and Sensing, in agreement with the earlier find- 
ings cited above. Five of the top eight types prefer Introver- 
sion and three-quarters prefer Sensing. In addition, three- 
quarters of the top eight prefer Feeling over Thinking. In 
general, the rankings in this table are in accord with data that 
reveal specific over- and underrepresentations of types and 
two-letter combinations of preferences that were found in 
earlier research. For example, ENFP, INT], and INFB who 
were underrepresented in the CHD groups in earlier re- 
search, occupy the 13th, 14th, and 15th ranks in Table 10.5. 

The information in Table 10.5 should alert counselors 
and therapists to the probability that some types are more 
prone to develop hypertension or heart disease than others. 
To the extent that these conditions are a response to the 
stresses of living, finding ways to reduce stress and encour- 
age effective coping strategies seems an appropriate goal. 

With regard to stress, sample members were asked to rate 
their typical level of stress about work, finances, children, 
intimate rclationship, school, health, caring for aging par- 
ents, balancing home and work, and “other.” These areas 
were rated as “very high,” “high,” “moderate,” “low,” “very 
low,” or “not applicable." Sample members overall rated all 
of the areas as moderately stressful, so the focus here is on 
the more extreme responses—those rating an area as 
extremely stressfal and those rating the area as quite low as a 
source of stress. 

Individual preference eflects were studied using log linear 
comparisons of degree of reported stress for cach stress cate- 
gory. The following significant differences were found: Intro- 
verts (D) were significantly higher than Extraverts (E) on 
work stress; types with a Sensing (S) preference were signifi- 
cantly higher than those preferring Intuition (N) on stress 


3 cc 


associated with health, care for aging parents, and balancing 
work and home; types who prefer Fecling (F) were signifi- 
cantly higher than those preferring Thinking (T) on the 
stress of finances, children, health, care for aging parents, 





and balancing home and work; types with a Perceiving pref- 
erence (P) were higher on stress associated with work; 
types who preferred Judging (J) reported higher stress on 
health and balancing work and home. Over and beyond 
these single-preference results, data for whole types suggest 
some interesting complexities that may be of interest to 
counselors and psychotherapists. Table 10.6 shows the top- 
ranked and bottom-ranked types in each stress category. 

As can be seen, some areas appear to be particularly 
stressful for some types but provide minimal stress for oth- 
ers. INFJ is top ranked in four stress categories, and ENTP 
occupies the bottom rank on three of the nine categories. As 
an indication of which types appear to be more and less vul- 
nerable to stress areas in general, Table 10.7 shows the num- 
ber of times each type appears in either the top four "more 
stressed” group or the bottom four “less stressed" group. 

This table suggests that Sensing Feeling types are partic- 
ularly likely to rate a number of areas stressful and that this 
is true regardless of their preference for Extraversion or 
[ntroversion. Further, ESFPs are among the top ranked in 
high stress in seven areas, while their companion dominant 
extraverted Sensing type, ESTP, has no high-stress areas 
among the top four, and six areas where low stress is 
reported. Both INT] and INTP report high stress in some 
areas and low stress in others, and INTJs are perhaps the 
most specific in their identification of high- and low-stress 
areas. The most clearly "less-stressed" types are ESTP, 
ENTP, and ENT]; the most clearly stressed are ESFP, ISFJ, 
and INTP It is also of note that of the “idealistic” NF types, 
who might be expected to be especially vulnerable to stress, 
only INFJs report numerous stress areas. 

Although some types appear be more stressed in general 
than other types, what different types find particularly 
stressful and nonstressful probably involves a complex 
interaction among personality, the nature of the stress, and 
unknown other factors. Counselors and psychotherapists 
who have worked with clients of different types may find 
confirmation for their observations in some of these 
research results. These possible type-by-stressor relation- 
ships seem to suggest that the stresses of everyday life have 
different effects on different types and that some types are 
more naturally reactive to (or willing to acknowledge) 
stress than others. Counselors can take this into account 
when trying to assess the severity of their clients’ responses. 
For example, an ENTP client who reports fecling very 
stressed in many areas may be of more concern to a thera- 
pist than an [SF] client with the same complaints. 

Research also supports the hypothesis that types cope 
with stress differently and with greater or lesser facility. Ear- 
lier work by Hammer (1992) using the Coping Resources 
Inventory revealed that different types reported different 
kinds of coping resources and also differed in access to cop- 
ing resources in general. National sample members were 
asked how thev *usually coped with stress" and could mark 
all the categories that applied. As shown in Table 10.8, a 


Table 10.6 


Category 


Work 


Finances 


Children 


—————— 


Intimate relationship 


PRT OE 


School 
Health 


ree 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 





Types Reporting Highest and Lowest Mean Levels of Stress in Nine Categories 


Caring for aging parents 


S/O a hf I f m e rt ig cts ACAI 


Balancing home and work 


IRSE E etr G 


Other 


Types Reporting Higher Stress 


INF) INFP 


ISFP ESFP 
ISFP ESFP 
INF] ESFP 
INF] ESFP 
ISF] ESF] 
ISF) ESFP 
ISFJ INFJ 


INF) INTP 


Types Reporting 


Lower Stress 


INTJ IST) ENT| ENF} ESF) ISFP 
ENFP INTJ ENT| ISTP ESTP EST] 
ISF) INTP ENTP INTJ ESTP ENFP 
INTJ INTP ENTP ENF] ESTP ENT] 
INTP ISF] INTJ ENFP ENT] EST] 
ISFP ESFP ENTP INTJ ENTJ INFP 
ISFP  ESF| INT| ESTP ENTP INTP 
ESF} ENFJ ISTP ENTP INTJ ESTP 
ISFP ESFP ENFP ENTP ENF] ESTP 





Note: N = 3,036. Each category rated on a five-point scale; See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


Table 10.7 Number of Times a Type 
Is Included in Highest 
and Lowest Categories 


Type High Low Type High Low 
IST] | 0 ISTP 0 2 
ISFJ 5 0 INTP 4 | 
ESTE 0 6 ESTJ 0 2 
ESEE 7 0 ENT] 0 2 
INT] 3 5 ISFP 5 | 
INFJ 5 0 INFP | | 
ENTP 0 6 ESF] 3 | 
ENFP | 3 ENF] | 3 


Note: N = 3,036. See Appendix for a descripuon of the sample. 


Source: National sample 


wide variety of ways of coping with stress were studied. The 
table shows the top-ranked and bottom-ranked types for 
each coping method. A comparison of the percentages 
across categories indicates the relative popularity of differ- 
ent coping methods across types, with “try to think of 
options” being frequently chosen by all types, and “talk to 
professional” and “develop physical symptoms” chosen rel- 
atively infrequently. Perhaps this latter observation refleets 
the general percentage of the U.S. population who seek the 
services of mental health professionals and physicians for 
perceived stress-stimulated probleins. 


Although belief in a higher spiritual power is not neces- 
sarily related to differential coping with stress, therapists 
may find it useful to understand their clients’ approach to 
spirituality in order to incorporate this into the therapeutic 
process. Table 10.9 shows, as might be expected, that the 
types answered the question “Do you believe in a higher 
spiritual power?" quite differently. The choices permitted 
were "yes," "no," and "not sure." 

Every type predominantly answered “yes” to this ques- 
tion, as is apparent from the percentages for the “no” and 
"not sure" categories for the types listed. For example, 64.496 
of the INTJ respondents answered “yes,” though their per- 
centage of “yes” responses was lowest of all the types. As 
shown, the four top-ranked types saying “no” or “not sure" 
all have a preference for Thinking, and with the exception of 
ISTPs they all prefer Intuition as well. All four top-ranked 
types saying “yes” prefer Feeling, and three-quarters prefer 
Extraversion and Judging as well. The clear T—F difference in 
responding to this question is in aceord with the critical 
approach of Thinking types and the harmony-seeking desire 
of Feeling types. Therapists might take these natural differ- 
ences into account in expecting or encouraging different 
types to use spiritual resources as a way of coping or as a 
source of satisfaction. 

Job burnout as a response to stress has been productively 
studied using the MBTI instrument, particularly in Gardens 
1985 and 1988 research as reviewed in Shelton (1996). Gar- 
den found that responses to burnout differed when samples 
of types who primarily preferred Thinking over Feeling 
were studied. Specifically, she found that people with a 


238 . The Uses of Type 





Table 10.8 Top and Bottom Ranking Types in Methods of Coping with Stress 


Coping Method Highest Lowest 
Try to avoid ISEPEES9U ENTP 26.0 
stressful situations ESFP 54.5 ENT] 33.3 
ESFI oss ENFP 34.4 
ISE| 533 eu) 3S. 2 
Confront the problem ENTP 79.8 ISG Ps oe? 
ENT) 79.2 ISF) — 41.0 
EST R738 INFP 41.8 
ENFJ 68.3 INFJ 44.9 
Talk to someone close ESF} 74.1 ISTE 390 
ENF} 72.0 INTP 48.5 
ESL IST) 45.6 
INFP 63.7 ESTP 458 
Talk to professional INF] 24.5 ISTE 
INT) 16.9 ENTE 67 
ENFP 10.9 ESTP 76 
INFP i 3 zu 7. 8 
Rely on religious beliefs ESEJ 255.5 INTP 202 
INFJ 53.1 ENTP 202 
ENF} 50.0 INT) 24.6 
ISF] | 49.4 ENT) 25.0 
Try to think of options ENT) 87.5 ISFP | 545 
INTP 80.8 ISF] PE 
ENTP 79.8 ESFP 262.5 
INTJ 76.9 INF] 63.3 


Coping Method Highest Lowest 
Get upset or angry but SEP 2361 ENTJ 16.7 
don't show it INFP 34.9 ESTP T209 
ISF) 34.8 ENF] 420.7 
INTP 34. 3 = EST] ZI 
Get upset or angry ISTP 42.9 ENT) 18.8 
and show it SFP aoe EST = 277 
ESFDEES 6-3 IND 27 3 
ENF 36. a DIM 293 
Develop physical symptoms ENFP 21.1 EST MSS 
INFJ 20.4 ENTREES 
ENFJ 19.5 ISTP 78 
ISFP 16.9 Si = 
Sleep ISEE 23.3 EST) 14.1 
INT) 23.1 ESLP 5.5 
ESFP 20.6 ENTP 15.4 
ISF) 3202 INTP 372 
Exercise ENF] 40.2 ISP se 
ENT| 358.4 ISKR 46:2 
ENTP 34.6 ESFP 17.8 
INTJ 30. 8 Qum m 9 
Watch television SFPE 430.6 INT) 15.4 
ESFP 392 ESTIS 
ISGP m 1.2 ENFP 20.6 
EN: E ENFJ 207 





Note: Respondents could mark as many as applied; p values for all 2 x 16 chi-squares were significant at .000 to .027 except for "Sleep" category. 


See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source National sample. 


Thinking preference were more likely to seek people out 
rather than avoid them, as has typically been found for sam- 
ples drawn from the helping professions, which tend to 
attract a large proportion of types who prefer Feeling. 

The Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBl; Maslach, Jackson, 
&amp; Leiter, 1996) measures the effects of job burnout on 
individuals. lt contains three subscales: Emotional Exhaus- 
tion—the depletion of emotional energy, as distinct from 
physical or mental fatigue; Depersonalization—a response to 
work that requires personal sensitivity to clients; and Per- 
sonal Accomplishment 








an emphasis on ones effectiveness 
and success in bringing benefit to clients. The MBI and 
MBTI Form M were administered to a sample of 82 employ- 
ees at a large hospital. Table 10.10 shows the mean scores 
for the three top- and bottom-ranking types for the three 
MBI scales. Note the apparent vulnerability to “Emotional 
Exhaustion” and "Depersonalization" forms of burnout of 
the ISEPs and ISFJs, which is similar to their stress responses 
as shown in Tables 10.7 and 10.8. 

Given the quite small sample size, it is not surprising 
that nonsignificant results were obtained for an analysis of 


Table 10.9 Top-Ranked Types Rating “No, - 
"Not Sure,’ or “Yes” Regardit | 


Belief in a Higher Spiritual Power - 


No Not Sure Yes 
INT) 23.1% ISTP 19226 ENF] 91.4 75 
ENT] 146% INTP 16.226 ESF} 90.2% 
INTP 11.1% ENTP 14.6% ENFP 89.8 % 
ISTP 9.9% ENT] 14.6% ISF) 1389.7 276 


Note: N = 3,036. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample 


variance using all 16 types and the three MBI scales. How- 
ever, the same statistic applied to each dichotomy separately 
yielded significant F values for E-1 on “Emotional Exhaus- 
tion” (F = 8.608, p = 004), with Introverts having the higher 
mean, and "Depersonalization" (F = 4.146, p = .045), again 
with Introverts having the higher mean scores. These 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 239 





Table 10.10 Types with Highest and Lowest Mean Scores on Burnout Scales 








Emotional Exhaustion Depersonalization Personal Accomplishment 
High Low High Low High Low 
ISFP 36.83 ENT) 11.67 ISFP 11.00 ENTP 2.67 ESTP 46.00 EST] 29.00 
ISFJ 30.0 ESFP 12.00 ISF) 10.20 ESFP “Zags hl cmt END 33.33 
EST] 77.0 ESTP 14.00 INTJ 8.25 ESTP 3:00 ENF] 39.83 INTJ 34.75 
INT] 28.5 TUNIS IST) 7.81 ENF] 5.17 ESFH eg S0 INFE 35:25 





Note: n = 82. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source’ Fairview Health Services 


Table 10.1! Mean Scores of Highest and 
Lowest Types on Positive 


and Negative Affectivity 


Positive Affectivity Negative A ffectivity 
Highest Lowest Highest Lowest 
ESTP 41.00 ISinae28.79 INFP 26.60 ENT] 18.60 
ENT] 40.20 INF] 29.83 INTJ 20.60 INTJ 20.60 
ENF] 37.75 INFP 30.56 ISFJ 24.97 INF] 20.67 
Edda 37.35 INTP 31.00 IS o2 ENF] 20.87 


ee ee ee INST ACOUIEEEXCEEECODCULLLALT. ee ee x) 
Note: N = 279. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source’ lowa State University. 


results are in accord with the differential availability of 
“extraverting energy” of Extraverts and Introverts. Based on 
these data, however, one’s sense of effectiveness appears to 
be unrelated to energy preference. Analyses for the other 
three dichotomies did not yield significant results on any of 
the MBI scales. Studies with larger, more heterogeneous 
samples may produce more specific results by whole types 
and groupings of type. 

Another study that used Form M explored the Positive and 
Negative Affectivity Scales (Watson, Clark, &amp; Tellegen, 1988) 
in relation to type. Positive affectivity reflects feelings of hap- 
piness, enthusiasm, interest, and inspiration and a general 
lack of anxiety. Negative affectivity reflects anxiety, fear, dis- 
tress, and distractedness. A sample of 279 college students at 
a large Midwestern university were asked to rate their feel- 
ings in these areas “during the last three weeks” on a five- 
point scale varying from “very slightly” to “extremely.” Table 
10.11 shows the mean scores of the four highest and four 
lowest types on the two scales. 

Analvsis of variance of positive and negative affectivity 
data showed a significant F value (F = 2.0, p = .000) for posi- 
tive affectivity, most likely reflecting the tendency of the 
Extraverted types to score higher than Introverted types, with 
the possible exception of INTJs. The same statistical proce- 
dure for negative affectivity yielded insignificant results. As 


suggested in Table 10.11, types in the highest and lowest cat- 
egories are somewhat inconsistent, and mean differences of 
high and low groups do not appear to be substantially difter- 
ent. In general, then, these data suggest that although posi- 
tive affect is more likely to be acknowledged by types who 
prefer Extraversion, the reporting of negative affect does not 
differentiate between Extraverted and Introverted types. 


Using Type with Different Age Groups 


Regardless of whether an assessment tool is used to elicit 
type, awareness of the reality of type differences is helpful to 
clinicians who work with clients in all age groups. The 
breadth of application lends credence to the notion that 
typology serves as a basic template that influences and inter- 
acis with many other factors in an individuals personality. 
Counselors and psychotherapists are therefore likely to 
note type influence with clients of any age and who present 
a wide variety of psychological and emotional problems. 
This section is designed to advise practitioners and alert 
them to some of the relevant issues in using type with dif- 
ferent age groups. 


Issues with Child Clients 


Type is most effectively assessed in children using the Murphy- 
Meisgcier Type Indicator for Children (MMTIC), which dit- 
fers from the MBTI in content, construction, and scoring. 
For information on type assessment in children, see the 
manual for this instrument (Meisgeier &amp; Murphy, 1987). 
Professionals in this area generally advise caution in speci- 
fying a type for young and preadolescent children, as there 
may be wide variations in the developmental process for 
individual children. Nevertheless, counselors and thera- 
pists who treat young children often find that the hypothe- 
sized type of a child may be related to the childs presenting 
problems. For example, some ESTP and ESFP children may 
be referred for various behavioral disorders, hyperactivity, 
or attention deficit disorder when in fact the behaviors that 


240  TheUses of Type 


stimulated the referral may be well within what is expected 
for young Extraverted Sensing types, whose natural style is 
very active, interactive, experiential, and experimental. 
Awareness of the possible influence of type differences can 
therefore aid mental health professionals in the diagnostic 
process. For additional information on the relevance of 
type in assessing and counseling children, see Murphy 
(1992, 1997). 


Issues with Adolescent Clients 


Regardless of the presenting issues that bring adolescent 
clients to a mental health professional, administration and 
interpretation of the MBTI can provide immense relief and 
alfirmation for young people who are questioning their 
acceptability as individuals and menibers of important peer 
groups. For example, a 15-year-old INTP who is ambivalent 
about “fitting in” with her peers can be assured of the rca- 
sonable and natural basis for her ambivalence; an ENFP 
who has been persistently criticized for procrastinating can 
feel validated by his type description and then encouraged 
to “go against his grain" by adopting some strategies for 
meeting deadlines; an INFJ can be reassured that her 
uncanny knack for knowing the unspoken thoughts and 
feelings of others is shared by other people of her type; an 
EST] can gain insight into why his fricnds sometimes are 
irritated by his attempts to be helpful in group situations. 
Psychological type develops over the lifespan. Young peo- 
ple are expected to be less clear about their preferences than 
mature people, as is evident in the lower reliabilities found 
when the MBTI is administered to younger groups (see 
Chapter 8). Some adolescents may have difficulty identily- 
ing a best-fit type because of this as well as because their 
expression of type may be influenced by pressures to “fit in” 
with the group. Determining a preference for Extraversion 
or Introversion can be most affected by this. Counselors and 
therapists who use the MBTI inventory with adolescents 
should be prepared for questions and doubts from some 
clients. Other adolescenti clients may readily verify a type that 
fits them well. It is important to convey to unsure clients that 
this is natural, normal, and predictable and that it is not nec- 
essary or important for the client to scttle on a type at this 
stage of life. The counselor can use the clients type informa- 
tion to validate, reassure, and help the adolescent cope with 
stresses and pressures and better prepare for the future. 


Issues with Middle-Aged and Older Clients 


As discussed in Chapter 3, Jungs theory predicts differen- 
tial use and development of type in the second half of life, 
with greater energy bcing devoted to exercising the tertiary 
and inferior functions. There is wide variation in ways of 
recognizing and expressing less developed functions dur- 
ing midlife and into old age. Many individuals “mellow” 
into old age, gradually shifting energy and focus from the 
dominant and auxiliary functions by adding interest in the 


tertiary and inferior functions. For others, the shift may be 
more sudden, extreme, and disruptive. These latter older 
clients are more likely to seek help than those for whom 
the process is mild and gradual. One can interpret the 
behavior of many clients who come to therapy with an 
apparent midlife crisis as the midlife emergence of the 
third and fourth functions. Clients in this situation may 
rcport loss of interest and meaning in what has heretofore 
been exciting and important, a feeling of being invaded by 
alien and uncontrollable thoughts and feelings, and a dis- 
tressing loss of a sense of self. In the most dramatic cases, the 
individual may leave spouse and family to take up a new 
partner, or a successful career may become so unsatislying 
that the person leaves it to do something entirely different. 
Therapists sensitive to the characteristics of the inferior func- 
tion can often interpret the clients experiences in these terms 
and explore the developmental nature and meaningfulness of 
these often quite puzzling and distressing experiences. 
Understanding the meaning and importance of what is hap- 
pening to them sometimes enables clients to proceed in their 
development without making major changes in their own 
and others’ lives. For information on the dynamies and 
development of midlife and older people, see Corlett and 
Millner (1993), Quenk (1993), and Millner (1998). 


Using Type with Couples 


Happy and unhappy marriages are found in all type combi- 
nations, and type differences and similarities are likely to be 
only one of several sources of difficulty in a relationship. 
Regardless of the nature of such other difficulties, a typologi- 
cal approach to couples counseling can enhanee the thera- 
peutic process and increase the likelihood of an effective 
outcome. 

Focusing on natural typc differences early in the coun- 
scling process can be the "neutral ground" that enhances 
rapport, reassures the couple that the therapist is not likely 
to “take sides,” and provides a nonjudgmental! language for 
discussing sourees of irritation and misunderstanding. 
When interpreting results of the MBTI to a couple, it is use- 
ful to let partners guess their preferences as they are dis- 
cussed and to compare these with the answers given on the 
Indicator. Both partners can be asked to comment on the 
accuracy ol type descriptions in describing both themselves 
and their partner and to discuss type characteristics as they 
alfect their relationship. 

When couples take the type Indicator "for each other"— 
that is, when they answer the questions the way they think 
the partner would (see the section on administration and 
interpretation later in this chapter)—the therapist can iden- 
tify probable issues in the couples difficulties. Particular 
counseling issues are indicated when couple members rec- 
ognize that they are different from each other and accurately 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 241 


Table 10.12 Mutual Usefulness of Opposite Types 


Intuitive Types Can Benefit from the 
Natural Inclination of Sensing Types to 


Bring up pertinent facts 
Face the realities of the current situation 
Apply experience to solving problems 


Focus on what needs attention now 


Feeling Types Can Benefit from the 
Natural Inclination of Thinking Types to 


Analyze consequences and implications 
Hold consistently to a policy 

Stand firm for important principles 
Create rational systems 


Be fair 


Sensing Types Can Benefit from the 
Natural Inclination of Intuitive Types to 


Bring up new possibilities 
Anticipate future trends 
Apply insight to solving problems 


Focus on long-term goals 


Thinking Types Can Benefit from the 
Natural Inclination of Feeling Types to 


Forecast how others will react and feel 

Make needed individual exceptions 

Stand firm for human-centered values 

Organize people and tasks harmoniously 

Appreciate the Thinking type along with everyone else 


Source From Introduction to Type (6th ed., p. 30), by | B Myers, 1998, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1998 by Consulting Psychologists Press. 


Used with permission. 


assess the nature of their differences by answering the MBTI 
“correctly” for each other. For such a couple, a typological 
explanation of the differences they already recognize in 
each other can be therapeutic. Rather than attributing dif- 
ferences to the partner’ “annoying habits,” “hang-ups,” or 
“incompetence,” the couple can learn to appreciate the 
nature and reality of their differences as legitimate and 
interesting. 

The task of counseling is very different when the couple 
believe they are both the same or similar in type (therefore 
answering for each other “inaccurately”), when in fact they 
are quite different. When a person believes the partner to be 
a different type from what he or she actually is, the misper- 
ceived partners communications and behavior arc likely to 
be misunderstood. The misperceiving partner may have a 
distorted notion of the others needs and motives. For 
example, an ENTP husband answered the Indicator for his 
wife as if she were an ENFP, but she verified her type as 
ESFJ. Her major complaint in the marriage was that she felt 
discounted, ignored, and misunderstood by her husband. 
It became evident during counseling that he did not recog- 
nize her central desire for harmony and togetherness. 
Instead, he assumed that what she really wanted was more 
freedom to pursue her many interests without interference 
from him. He was genuinely puzzled when she told him 
how bad she felt. In another couple, the INFJ husband and 
his ESFP wife both saw each other as ISTJs; they later recog- 
nized that both of their fathers were probably ISTJs. The 
partners thus projected an exaggerated and distorted IST] 


personality on each other, each seeing the other as demand- 
ing, critical, and controlling. These and similar kinds of dis- 
crepancies in the ways couples answer the MBTI for each 
other can often reveal the nature of the couples expecta- 
tions of and projections onto each other. 


Differences Related to Each 
of the Four Dichotomies 


Counseling issues vary considerably with the type mix of 
the couple. Sharing the perspective on the mutual useful- 
ness of opposite types, as shown in Table 10.12 and in 
Introduction to Type (Myers, with Kirby &amp; Myers, 1998), 
can be a focal point for the couple to gain insight into the 
validity of their diffcrences and the positive nature of each 
others contribution to the relationship. In addition, the 
following suggest issues and approaches to differences in 
each of the type dichotomies. 


E-i Differences Issues of sociability (Extraversion) and 
privacy (Introversion) need to be resolved for couples who 
differ on this dichotomy. The Extravert needs to have 
sufficient external stimulation and the Introvert needs 
sufficient time alone. A first step is getting each partner to 
recognize the legitimate but different energy needs of the 
other partner. Such recognition is difficult when either 
partner is Introverted and expends his or her finite 
Extraverted energy during the work day. Little Extraverted 
energy may be left for talking and interacting with the 


242 The Uses of Type 


partner or for socializing with others in the evening. An 
effective recommendation is for the Introvert to have a 
period of time alone soon after coming home. The couples 
agreement to the legitimaey of such brief "alone time” ean 
prove restorative and enable the Introvert to be responsive 
and sociable. 

Couples who differ on Extraversion-Introversion may 
also have a problem communicating, since the Extraverted 
partner is more likely to reach deeisions by talking them out 
and getting feedback, while the Introverted partner is more 
likely to process issues internally, sharing only the final eon- 
clusion. This difference leaves the Extraverted partner feeling 
excluded from an important source of satisfaction—mutual 
sharing. The Introverted partner may experience the Extra- 
verted partners insistence on joint problem solving as intru- 
sive and controlling. Explaining their different approaches to 
processing and sharing information can encourage them to 
modify their mutual misperception. 


S-N Differences When a couple differs on Sensing and 
Intuition, misunderstandings can occur because the two 
people often look at the same event very differently. It is 
important that they define terms carefully. Intuitive type 
partners with rapid insights can make Sensing type partners 
feel slow and mundane. Sensing type partners with a solid 
sense of reality can cause Intuitive partners to feel im- 
practical and unobservant. Differences of this nature can 
often be expressed as eategorical accusations. A careful 
explanation of their very different processes of gathering 
and trusting information can help the couple understand 
and accept the reality of their differences. The counselor ean 
encourage them to verify their understanding of each other 
by asking elarifying questions and accepting the answers as 
valid reflections of the partners state of mind. 

T-F Differences When a couple differs in Thinking and 
Feeling, decision-making issues can be a source of dilficulty, 
since one partner will favor a logical, objective approach to 
arrive at truth and the other will value a personal, subjective 
approach to arrive at harmony. Thinking types can become 
irritated when Feeling types appear to ignore the logie of a 
situation and come to a conclusion that seems illogical; 
Feeling types often accuse Thinking type partners of being 
cold, unearing, and hypereritical. Such misperceptions 
oceur regardless of gender, although gender stereotypes add 
an additional stressor when addressing Thinking-Feeling 
differences in relationships. 

Differences on this dichotomy are subject to definitional 
misunderstandings as well as gender stereotypes. Thinking 
is often confused with intellectual competence and lack of 
emotion; Feeling is confused with intellectual fuzziness and 
excessive emotionality. Thinking is assumed to be the special 
province of men, Feeling of women. Thus when the male 
prelers Thinking and the female Feeling, there is conformity 
to what is expected. However, this conformity can encourage 





both the couple and unaware therapists to assume that gen- 
der accounts for what are primarily Thinking—Feeling differ- 
ences. Rescarch supporting clinical observation regarding 
type and gender differences can be found in Otis and 
Quenk (1989) and Demarest (1997). When the male is the 
Feeling type and the female the Thinking type, confusion 
and misunderstandings arise because neither partner con- 
forms to expectations. There may be accusations that the 
woman is unfeminine and the man lacks masculine traits. 
Helping couples distinguish between genuine gender influ- 
ences and Thinking-Feeling differences is often a very 
fruitful therapeutic intervention. 

Thinking types can improve relationships by voicing 
appreciation before giving criticism and by making critical 
comments only when necessary, rather than as a natural, 
automatic response to the partner and the world at large. 
Feeling types can improve relationships by stating their 
wishes clearly, so that the Thinking type does not have to 
guess about their needs and desires. Feeling types can also 
avoid having hurt feelings by learning to differentiate 
between intended critical assessments and comments that 
sound like personal criticism but are merely impersonal 
observations from the viewpoint of their Thinking type 
partner. Couples therapists can be especially helpful by 
using their type knowledge to "translate" the Thinking lan- 
guage of one partner into the Feeling language of the other, 
and vice versa. Such “type translations” were first incorpo- 
rated into psychotherapy by Jung himself. As described by 
one of his biographers, Barbara Hannah (1976), "[A]fter he 
had written Psychological Types and had considerably more 
experience of people, Jung was able to speak the language 
of every type. Just as he took a lot of trouble to learn the 
languages of his patients (English, French, and so on), so 
he learned to put things into the language of the psycholog- 
ical type to whom he was talking" (p. 132). 


J-P Differences Issues of order, territory, and lifestyle are 
typically associated with the Judging-Perceiving dichotomy. 
Order in the surroundings is often more important to the 
Judging partner; spontaneity and freedom are more 
important to the Pereeiving partner. How much advance 
planning is necessary or comfortable for each partner may 
also be an issue. As a counseling technique, the practitioner 
might have the couple discuss how thev have planned for 
vacations and what each believes to be the issues in vacation 
planning. This exercise can be enlightening to couples. 
Disagreements are also likely to arise about how much data 
should be collected before making important decisions and 
taking action. The Perceiving type partner may wish to do 
an exhaustive search of all the available alternatives before 
purchasing a new piece ol furniture, while the Judging type 
partner may be ready to decide alter seeing only a few items. 
A counselor can encourage forbearanee of each other's 
styles and suggest ways to compromise to achieve relative 
comfort for both partners about the timing of decisions. 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 243 


Table 10.13 Attraction Ratios (AR) for Men and Women Married to Opposite and Like Types 


ARWhen AR When 
Married to the Married to the 

Type of Woman Opposite Type Same Type 
IST) 0.56 0.53 
ISTP 0.00 0.00 
ESTP 0.00 0.00 
EST] 0.9| 0.97 
ISF] 0.60 1.49 
ISFP 0.00 2217 
ESEP 0.00 4.55 
ESF] 0.23 3.23 
INF] 0.78 6.25 
INFP 1.19 1.67 
ENE 1.28 1.52 
ENFJ 0.00 8.33 
INT] 0.00 222 
INTP 0.00 ERE 
ENTP 0.00 0.00 
ENTJ 0.00 0.00 


AR When AR When 
Married to the Married to the 

Type of Man Opposite Type Same Type 
IST] 1.39 0.36 
ISTP 0.00 0.00 
EST 3.03 0.00 
EST] 6.06 1.14 
ISF] 0.00 IIS 
ISFP 0.00 0.46 
ESAE 0.00 1.67 
ESF] 0.00 t.33 
INF] 0.00 4.17 
INFP 0.66 5:26 
ENFP 0.28 1.23 
ENFJ 0.00 4.76 
INTJ 0.00 3.85 
INTP 0.56 4.17 
ENTP 1.23 0.00 
ENT] 0.00 0.00 





Source: From “Attraction, Satisfaction, and Psychological Types of Couples,” by N. S. Manoles, D. P Strickert, and A L. Hammer, 1996, Journal of Psychological Type, 36, p. 21 


Copyright 1996 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with permission. 


Type Dynamics in Couples Therapy 


The influence of type dynamics (described earlier) is even 
greater when working with couples than when working 
with individual clients. Intimate relationships provide a fer- 
tile ground for projection of unconscious processes. For 
example, an INFP-ENT] couple embody each others infe- 
rior functions. In the normal demands and stresses of every- 
day life, the INFP husband may easily perceive his ENT] 
wile as critical, judgmental, and disapproving, projecting his 
own inferior extraverted Thinking onto the wife, who is an 
appropriate “host” for this projection. Similarly, the ENT] 
wife can respond by feeling intensely hurt, unloved, and 
rejected, projecting her own inferior introverted Fecling 
onto her husband. Couples counselors who are sensitive to 
these and similar dynamic interactions can help the two 
people understand their own and each others often exagger- 
ated reactions. Such awareness can promote mutual accep- 
tance and enhance the intimacy in the rclationship. 

Couples who share the same type can also face difficulties 
in relating to each other and to others. Because they share 
the same blind spots, both may inadvertently neglect impor- 
tant aspects of daily living and avoid incorporating unfamil- 
iar but important alternative perspectives into their lives. A 
therapist working with such a couple can point out the 
inevitability of the “missing” points of view in their lives and 
help them come up with ways of broadening the scope of 
their activities in useful ways. Another way that like-type 
couples sometimes handle mutually unappealing tasks is for 


one partner to take on the responsibility for some of the dis- 
liked areas. The reluctantly responsible partner may become 
resentful and irritable, especially if such efforts go unrecog- 
nized or are criticized by the other person. A couples thera- 
pist can reduce the strain this causes in the relationship by 
helping the couple recognize and acknowledge their mutual 
distastes. They may then be able to divide those tasks more 
equitably, or at the very least express appreciation to the per- 
son who voluntarily “goes against her or his grain.” 


Research on Type and Couples 


Couples often ask how common it is to marry their own 
type or an opposite type. The 1985 MBTI Manual com- 
pared data from two samples of couples—Myers with 
Myers (1980/1995, p. 128) and a sample consisting of 
combined data from the databank of the Center for Appli- 
cations of Psychological Type (CAPT). Those data as well 
as more recent research (Marioles, Strickert, Babcock, 
Campbell, &amp; Cortner, 1997; Marioles, Strickert, &amp; Hammer, 
1996; Sherman, 1981) indicate that people tend to marry 
similar rather than dissimilar types. For example, Marioles, 
Strickert, and Hammer (1996) calculated attraction ratios 
for men and women married to opposite and like types, 
where higher ratios indicate greater attraction and lower 
ratios less attraction. Table 10.13 shows the attraction ratios 
calculated for each type within cach gender. The attraction 
ratio is the percentage of people of one type who marry a 
person of another type divided by the percentage of that 


244 The Uses of Type 


type in the base population. Higher attraction ratios mean 
that the pairing occurs more frequently than would be 
expected relative to its occurrence in the base population. 
Only in three notable instances (ESTJ men married to 
INFP women, ESTP men married to INF] women, and 
ENTP men married to ISF] women) is there any evidence 
of opposite types being attracted to each other. Other pair- 
ings reflect greater evidence of type similarity. 

Marioles et al. (1996) also looked at type and a measure 
of satisfaction based on self-assessment of the relationship 
as “very dissatisfied” and “somewhat dissatisfied” (com- 
bined) compared with “somewhat satisfied” and “very satis- 
fied” (combined). In examining rankings by the percentage 
of relationships in whieh both partners were satisfied, no 
type-related pattern was found for women. However, the 
same analysis for men showed a statistically significant 
higher percentage of male Extraverts in relationships in 
which both partners were satisfied. It was further observed 
that INTP men had by far the lowest pereentage of relation- 
ships in which both partners were satished (only 33%), 
although INTP men themselves reported being satisfied with 
their relationship. This result led to the development of an 
obliviousness index—the difference between the percentage 
of one type who say they are satisfied and the pereentage of 
the same type in the relationships in which both partners are 
satisfied. The authors hypothesized that the greater the dif- 
ference in the couples satisfaction levels, the more “oblivi- 
ous" is the partner with the higher satisfaction rating. Table 
10.14 shows the obliviousness indexes for cach type sepa- 
rately by gender. It is interesting to note that INTP men 
have the highest index of all the types, regardless of gender 
(3396). ENFJs are highest among female types (1396), 
though at a much lower percentage than male INTPs. 

Another source of data on marital satisfaction comes 
Irom the national sample. Subjects in this sample were 
asked to rate their satisfaction with their marriage or inti- 
mate relationship using the same four-point scale as that 
used in the Marioles ct al. (1996) study. The national sample 
data were analyzed by type but not by gender. Partner satis- 
faction was not assessed in the national sample study. The 
two sets of data, therefore, cannot be compared. In addition 
to rating satisfaction with marriage, subjects in this study 
were also asked to rate their satisfaction with their friend- 
ships and their relationships with family members. Figure 
10.1 shows the results for all 16 types in their ratings of the 
three areas of relationship satisfaction. It is important to 
note that types who are satisfied or dissatished in one rela- 
tionship area tend to rate the other areas in the same way as 
well. Perhaps “relationship satisfaction" is a generalized 
phenomenon that reflects the possibility that different types 
use different definitions of or criteria for satisfaction. The 
observation that, in general, types who prefer Extraversion 
are more satisfied than types who prefer Introversion would 
tend to support such a conjecture. Introverts may have 
greater discomfort with and/or “idealized” expectations of 
relationships in comparison with Extraverts, whose comfort 
in and greater ease with others may be in operation. 


Table 10.14 The Obliviousness Index 


Percentage of Percentage of 


Men of This Type Women of This 
Who Are Satisfied, Type WhoAre 
Type of Whereas the Satisfied, Whereas 

Satisfied Person Woman Is Not the Man Is Not 
IST} 16% Th 
ISTE Q76 0% 
ESTE 9% 0% 
EST] 12% 9% 
ISFJ 14% 10% 
ISFP 22% 4% 
ESFP 21% 5% 
ESF] 10% 8% 
INF} 31% 0% 
INFP [1% 0% 
ENFP 776 | 276 
ENF} 10% 13% 
INTJ 0% 11% 
INTP 33% 0% 
ENTP | 126 | 126 
ENT] 19% 0% 


Source. From “Attraction, Satisfacuon, and Psychological Types of Couples,” by N. S 
Manoles, D. P Strickert, and A. L Hammer, 1996, Journal of Psychological Type, 36, 
p. 24 Copynght 1996 by Journal of Psychological Type. Used with permission 


With regard to satisfaction with marriage/initimate rela- 
tionship, Figure 10.1 shows INFJ, INEP, and INTP types to 
be the most dissatisfied and ENFJ, ESFP, and ESFJ types to 
be the most satisfied. INT] types seem particularly dissatis- 
fied with friendships and relatively more satisfied with their 
family relationships. 

Empirical studies that assess the use of type by therapists 
in conducting couples therapy are not available. However, 
the large-scale and multifaceted research of Marioles, 
Hammer, and their colleagues provides relevant results on 
attraction, satisfaction, persistence of relationships, and 
associated variables. For example, their research indicated 
that the two male types who tended 1o marry their oppo- 
sites were ESTJs and IST]s, and that these two types had 
also been married most often. Clinical observation and 
experience seem to support this in that ISTJ-ENFP couples 
(regardless of gender mix) seem to seek therapy more often 
than other opposite combinations. However, ESTJ-INFP 
couples appear relatively infrequently for couples counsel- 
ing. Perhaps this particular opposite type mix promotes the 
kind of stability and division of roles and responsibilities 
that is satisfying for both partners. Another clinical obser- 
vation is that IST] and EST] male clients whose wives have 
initiated a divorce scem to have greater difficulty than other 
types in adjusting to being single, tend to remarry relatively 
quickly, and often have several marriages in their history. 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy — 245 








3.8 
3.6 
» 
$4 
J We + 
i e. m 
34 ? 
? * 
à 
E 4 
E] * " 
= 2 
3.0 
28 | | | 
IST] ESTP ISFJ ESFP INF} ENFP INTJ ENTP 
ISTP ESTJ ISFP ESF} INFP ENF} INTP ENT) 
Type 


mmm Marriage/intimate relationship w wm mm m Friendships — a s ara Family members 


Figure 10.1 Mean Ratings of Satisfaction with Intimate, Friendship, and Family Relationships for the 16 Types 


The Marioles-Hammer research project provides insights 
for couples therapists and reports results about whole type, 
in addition to differences on the four individual type 
dichotomies. These ongoing studies also use MBTI Form J 
and therefore provide information about the 27 subscales 
scored by that form. 


Using Type with Families 


Type concepts can be useful in family counseling. The type 
distribution of the family provides a language for talking 
about alliances, difficulties in communication, allocation of 
household tasks, differences over child rearing, and chil- 
drens career plans. 

When working with families, it is particularly relevant to 
discuss the value of type differences. Any relationship suffers 
if the oppositeness of preference is treated as an inferiority. 


The parent-child relationship suffers severely if a parent 
tries to make a child into a carbon copy of him- or herself. It 
is hard on children to find that à parent wishes they were 
something they definitely are not. Children who are Feeling 
types may try to distort their type in the desired direction; 
Thinking types may resist their parents expectations with 
hostility. Neither reaction repairs the damage done to the 
childs self-confidence. 

The Judging-Perceiving dichotomy can be important in 
child-parent relationships. For example, a parent describing 
a childs behavior in a Judging manner can be shown that his 
or her every description is full of judgments (“This is 
wrong." “He shouldn't have done that." “I made a mis- 
take."). Practice in the Perceiving attitude can lead to state- 
ments such as, "Why did it look like that to him?" "I won- 
der if he did it because . . . ?" The essence of the Perceiving 
attitude is that a topic opens up new questions and creates 
curiosity for learning more about a situation. Judgment 
closes the issue; perception opens it up for new discoveries. 


246 The Uses of Type 


Many Judging tvpes benefit from learning to stay longer in 
the Perceiving mode; many Perceiving types benefit from 
learning to come 10 closure. 

It can be helpful for the counselor to give parents a per- 
spective on how parenting dilfers based on the type of the 
child. It is easier for an orderly, practical Sensing Judging 
parent to raise a Sensing Judging child who has a desire to 
conform to structure than it is for that parent to rcar an 
independent Intuitive Perceiving child who finds structure 
and consistency anathema. Understanding type differences 
can reduce guilt in the relationship and promote problem 
solving on the part of both parent and child. 

Family therapists report that understanding type often 
helps all family members modify their perceptions about 
the meaning and motives behind each others behaviors. 
The therapist can suggest ways for family members to bet- 
ter explain themselves and more accurately assess the 
meaning of each others communications. Suggestions rele- 
vant to using type in families can be found in Meisgeier and 
Meisgeier (1989) and in Murphy (1992). Ginn (1995) 
describes the distinct ways in which each of the types func- 
tions as a member of a family; the way that type influences 
different ways of mothcring is presented in work by Penley 
and Stephens (1994). 


Using Type in Treatment 
for Chemical Dependency 


It is advisable that a respondent be drug-free for at least 30 
days prior to MBTI administration, or that the MBTI be 
administered at least 30 days after admission to the treat- 
ment program, as earlier administration is likely to yield 
unreliable results and may elicit a client's attempt at cop- 
ing, albeit unsuccessfully. Chemical- and alcohol-impaired 
clients are also likely to have a high frequency of low pref- 
erence clarity indexes when the MBTI is administered 
during active drug use. When entry into a treatment pro- 
gram is not voluntary and/or a client denies any abuse, 
inquiry should be made into the clients chemical use pat- 
tern during the preceding 30 days, to determine when the 
MBTI is best administered. 

Experienced counselors advise interpreting the MBTI 
inventory with caution, even after a 30-day drug-free period. 
As compared with general clients, those with addiction histo- 
ries may agree too readily with their reported type without 
carefully assessing its best fit. Such clients can be encouraged 
to focus on the parts of their description that seem to fit well 
as a vehicle for helping the counselor in treatment planning. 
Preliminary analysis of data collected on 500 male and female 
clients in an alcohol and drug addiction trcatment program 
supports the use of caution in administration and interpreta- 
tion. The MBTI was administered 30 days after admission and 


again six months later to these clients. Approximately 80% of 


them changed on at least onc preference on retest, with less 


than 20% retaining the same preferences the whole time. 
These investigators found that clients nearly always 
reported that their “changed” type was the best fit for them, 
often describing their earlier type as depicting their way of 
behaving while addicted. Many clients expressed relief at 
their newfound freedom to be themselves. However, they 
also reported that their families and friends showed some 
difficulty in accepting them in their newly emerged state 
(Shuck &amp; Manfrin, 1997). 

When attempting to determine best-fit type, therapists 
should be sensitive to such factors as age of onset of drug 
use. Arrested development of personality can be a conse- 
quence of early age of onset of addiction; doubts about type 
may be present, and helping the client identify his or her 
natural type may be a gradual and difficult process. Clients 
with carly onset of addiction as well as those with codepen- 
dency issues may “adopt” the type of the therapist, thus 
adding to their difficulty in recognizing who they are. 
Counselors who incorporate their knowledge of type in 
treating chemically dependent individuals attest that its 
value lies in helping them better understand their clients 
psychological makeup and enabling them to tailor interven- 
tions to the verified or hypothesized type of the client. Coun- 
selors also find it profitable to tailor their language to the 
clients strengths, as a way of encouraging collaboration in 
and cooperation with a treatment plan. In one treatment 
facility where type was routinely collected for both clients 
and therapists, an attempt was made to “match” clients and 
therapists in therapy groups. Chents whose types included 
a preference for Thinking and/or Judging were placed in a 
group cofacilitated by an INT] and an ISF] therapist. Feel- 
ing type clients were placed in a group co-led by an INFP 
and an ENFP, and a Sensing Perceiving therapist requested 
and was given a group made up of acting-out adolescents. 
An unusually low dropout rate was found for all three 
groups. Of particular note was that clients who were man- 
dated to be in treatment voluntarily remained in group 
treatment longer than was required—a phenomenon that 
occurred rarcly if ever prior to client-therapist “matching” 
(Shuck &amp; Manírin, 1997). 

Research with addictive populations shows some consis- 
tency in finding a preference for Introversion among those 
who seek treatment for chemical dependency, though gen- 
eralizing this result to addicted individuals who do not seek 
treatment is not warranted. For a review of studies of type 
and chemical dependency, sec Quenk and Quenk (1996). 


Summary of Clinical Research 


This section summarizes the rescarch presented in the 1985 
MBTI Manual and bricfly comments on studies included in 
the more recent MBTI Applications (see Quenk &amp; Quenk, 
1996), which covers research available since the manuals 
publication. Readers are referred to the latter publication for 


authors, titles, and details of the study results summarized 
here. The section is organized into major research topics. 


Providers and Users of Psychological Services 


Type theory can illuminate many of the personality and 
behavior differences among providers of psychological ser- 
vices, and it raises issues about the delivery of health care. 
All 16 types are represented by providers of psychological 
scrvices, and all 16 types become clients, but the distribu- 
tions of both differ from the general population. In theory, 
helping people through psychological methods requires 
more Intuitive than Sensing skills, since Intuition is con- 
cerned with perception of patterns, recognition of inferred 
meanings, and intangible relationships. In a study by New- 
man (1979), Intuitive types scored significantly higher than 
Sensing types on ability to identify implied meanings. A 
study by DiTiberio (1977) found Intuitive types higher for 
covert feeling messages. 

Any career that deals mainly with people tends to attract 
more Feeling than Thinking types. The 16 studies in the 
1985 MBTI Manual that looked at characteristics of 
providers of psychological services confirm this expecta- 
tion. A higher percentage of therapists/counselors who pre- 
ferred Feeling over Thinking was found in all but 5 of the 
32 samples analyzed separately in the 16 studies. In the 27 
studies in which a Feeling preference predominated, the 
percentages preferring Feeling over Thinking ranged from 
52 to 84. The studies covered included samples of coun- 
selor trainees (Levell, 1965), secondary school counselors 
(Terrill, 1970), Veterans Administration therapists (Braun, 
1971), counseling supervisees (Beck, 1973), residence hall 
assistants (Schilling, 1972), doetoral students in the help- 
ing professions (Frederick, 1975), counselors of runaway 
youth (Elliott, 1975), crisis center staff (Galvin, 1976), 
counseling students (Newman, 1979), APA clinical psy- 
chologists (Perry, 1975), psychiatrists and child psychia- 
trists (McCaulley, 1977), psychotherapists of differing ori- 
entations (Levin, 1978), helping professionals of various 
kinds (McCaulley, 1978), psychologists (Coan, 1979), 
Canadian student counselors (Casas &amp; Hamlet, 1984), and 
crisis center volunteers (Macdaid, 1984a). 

Across all these studies, Intuition and Feeling tended to 
predominate. Occupations that require practitioners to deal 
with large numbers of people tended to have more Ex- 
traverts, and there were relatively more Sensing types in the 
occupations in which counseling is accompanied by more 
paperwork. Given that the majority of the population 
prefers Sensing, the fact that most counselors prefer Intu- 
ition creates a responsibility for counselors to learn meth- 
ods for communicating with and treating Sensing type 
clients. 

Differing styles of doing therapy were reported for Sens- 
ing and Intuitive type therapists in the more recent studies 
reviewed in MBTI Applications (see Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996). 
Differences on the S-N dichotomy were revealed in the 
assessment of client symptoms and prognosis, the amount 


Uses of Type m Counseling and Psychotherapy — 247 





and kind of information needed for accurate evaluation of 
clients, and the use of metaphor. Differences on other 
dichotomies also provide potentially useful information for 
therapists in understanding their own styles of doing ther- 
apy and insight into ways they can modify their style to bet- 
ter accommodate clients ol different types. 

The results of some of the recent studies that looked at 
psychotherapy outcome variables point to possibly com- 
plex interrelationships among client and therapist type 
characteristics and outcome measures such as satisfaction. 
Therapist-client type similarity appears to affect some kinds 
of outcomes positively and others in negative or more com- 
plicated, nonlinear ways. Some of the earlier results re- 
ported by Mendelsohn (1966) seemed to anticipate such 
results. Relatively small numbers of subjects, types of ther- 
apy, different lengths of treatment and treatment settings, 
and other uncontrolled variables related to clients, thera- 
pists, and contexts make comparisons and generalizations 
(rom the available studies difficult. However, such results 
can be useful to practitioners in stimulating awareness of 
more subtle factors that may be at work in their interactions 
with clients. 

A recent study serves as a model of a carefully conceived, 
analyzed, and interpreted research effort that capitalizes on 
an in-depth understanding of type dynamics. Otis and 
Louks (1997) investigated the hypothesis that psychologi- 
cal dysfunction is expressed differently for different types. 
They studied a sample of Introverted male veterans using 
measures of “Rebelliousness” and “Psychological Distress” 
developed through a factor analysis of the Wiggins Content 
Scales of the MMPI. They found that INTP and ISTP types 
were both more likely to score higher than expected on the 
“Rebelliousness” measure as compared to a random sam- 
pling on this dimension, and significantly more likely to be 
diagnosed with combat-related post-traumatic stress disor- 
der as well as “antisocial” and “avoidant” personality 
disorders. They were also more likely to have heen arrested 
for a non-substance abuse crime and to have had trouble 
accommodating to the behavioral constraints imposed by 
the inpatient treatment facility in which the research was 
conducted. ISFJs were more likely to score lower on “Rebel- 
liousness," ISFPs had the highest score on “Subjective Dis- 
tress,” and ISEJs and INFJs were more likely to be given one 
of the “dramatie” diagnoses. INTJ was the only type to 
stand out with a diagnosis of major depression. Ihe 
rescarchers discuss these and other findings in the context 
of patient histories and as a function of the distinct dynamic 
qualities of the types. 


Professional Orientation 


In theory, Extraverts should preler to focus on environmental 
issues and to work with larger numbers of individuals and 
groups. Introverts should prefer to focus on intrapsychic 
therapy, to work with individuals, and to provide longer-term 
treatment. Sensing types should prefer to use more applied 


248 The Uses of Type 


methods; Intuitive types should prefer more dynamic 
approaches. Thinking types should prefer more analytical, 
"tough-minded" approaches, and Feeling types should be 
drawn to approaches that involve understanding the client's 
goals and values. Judging types should prefer more direc- 
tive and controlled kinds of treatment, while Perceiving 
types should favor methods that emphasize understanding 
the client. The 1985 MBTI Manual reported on several stud- 
ies that found significant differences (p « .05) among coun- 
selors of different types. These included Coan (1979), 
Levin (1978), Perelman (1978), and Witzig (1978). 

The studies reported in MBTI Applications (see Quenk &amp; 
Quenk, 1996) confirm those reported earlier in finding 
type-related factors in preference for treatment models. 
Practitioners who prefer Thinking tend to apply linear, logi- 
cal, analytic processes (as in behavioral and cognitive 
approaches); Feeling types prefer humanistic, affective 
approaches that emphasize the therapeutic relationship. 
The Sensing-Intuition and Judging-Perceiving differences 
found also corresponded to the preferences composing 
these dichotomies—Judging type counselors like operating 
in systematic ways, and Perceiving type practitioners prefer 
more flexibility; those who prefer Intuition like to under- 
stand how facts and ideas are interconnected; those who 
prefer Sensing use more prescribed methods. There ap- 
peared to be little if any effect attributable to Extraversion- 
Introversion differences. 


Treatment Strategies 


The 1985 MBTI Manual noted that “very little work has 
been conducted on the appropriate treatment method for 
any given type. However, there is some evidence about the 
counseling expectations of different types” (p. 73). This 
same statement appears to be true over IO years later. 

Carskadon (1979) asked college students what qualities 
they valued in a counselor. Thinking types rated behavioral 
characteristics higher, and Feeling types rated humanistic 
characteristics higher. In a study of college students, Weir 
(1976) found that Feeling types who listened to an audio- 
tape of a counselor demonstrating high unconditional posi- 
tive regard were significantly more likely to prefer this 
approach than were other types. A study by Arain (1968) 
found that among high school students secking counseling, 
Thinking types preferred cognitive characteristics in 
prospective counselors, and Feeling types preferred affec- 
tive characteristics. 

Colege undergraduates who volunteered for a small 
group "self-understanding" research project were 84% N (and 
5196 NF) types (McCary, 1970). In a group of medical stu- 
dents who were asked, “How important is it for the facul- 
ty to help you with your own personal development and 
self-understanding?," ST types reported low interest in self- 
understanding and NF types reported high interest in 
sclf-understanding. The ST types also reported that the fac- 
ulty placed more emphasis on self-understanding than 


they wanted. NF students in the same classes felt that the 
faculty were neglecting this part of their education (Otis as 
reported in McCaulley, 1978, p. 188). 

The studies by Mendelsohn and his colleagues using 
students who came to the university counseling center 
(1962-1967, cited at the beginning of this chapter) found 
the following significant differences: (1) Compared with 
their peers, those who preferred Intuition, Thinking, and 
Perceiving were more likely to be clients of the center; (2) 
when the students had types similar to those of their coun- 
selors, they came for more sessions overall, but they also 
missed more sessions during treatment; (3) students with 
types different from their counselors' almost always came for 
only a few sessions; (4) students who were more like or more 
unlike their counselors later rated the counseling experience 
less favorably than did students of middle similarity 

An unpublished study by Grant (1966) compared the 
type distribution of 114 students with personal problems 
coming to the counseling center at Auburn University to the 
distribution of the student body. Types overrepresented in 
the “problem group" were INFJ, INFP, INT], ISFP ENFP, 
and ENTP. Students underrepresented were ESTP, ISFJ, 
ENF), ESFJ, ESFP, and EST]. INFPs came for more counsel- 
ing sessions than did other students who sought counseling. 

In these few studies, it appears that Intuitive types, who 
are more interested in psychological approaches to life, are 
also more likely to seek psychological solutions to their 
problems. The studies also suggest that there may be a 
match hetween the kinds of treatments preferred by clients 
of a particular type and the kind of treatment offered by 
practitioners of the same type. The more recent studies 
reviewed in MBTI Applications (sce Quenk &amp; Quenk, 1996) 
confirm this finding. They reveal that just as people who 
prefer Intuition and Feeling disproportionately become 
counselors and psychotherapists, so do clients seeking ther- 
apy tend more often to be those same types. 


Supervision of Counseling 
and Psychotherapy Students 


A number of studies have appeared in the past 10 years that 
examine type influences on student counselors and thera- 
pists in relation to their supervisors as well as specific 
supervision variables. Type seemed to have little effect on 
the general satisfaction of supervisees with the supervision 
experience. However, meaningful outcome measures such as 
perceived effectiveness of supervision were found to be 
related to supervisee preference for Thinking or Feeling. A 
study by Schacht, Howe, and Berman (1989) used scores on 
the Barrett-Lennard Relationship Inventory as a measure of 
perception of the extent to which former training supervisors 
were judged as “facilitative” by a sample of clinical and coun- 
seling doctoral psychologists who had recently completed 
their training. The investigators found that, although both 
Thinking and Feeling types rated highly those supervisors 
who were high in such areas as “positive regard,” “empathy,” 


“unconditionality,” and “willingness to be known,” Feeling 
types significantly and consistently rated their most helpful 
supervisors as higher in “regard” and “empathy” than did 
Thinking types. 

Useful information for counselors and therapists who 
supervise trainees can be gleaned Irom studies that locus on 
the different needs and expectations of student therapists. A 
study by Swanson and O'Saben (1993) found that Sensing 
type supervisces expected tangible intervention by supervi- 
sors in times of crisis; Extraverted and/or Intuitive type 
supervisees wanted direct supervision of their therapy ses- 
sions; gentle confrontation by the supervisor was desired by 
supervisees with Introverted and/or Intuitive preferences; 
and Thinking and/or Perceiving type trainces wanted the 
supervisor to be willing to engage in struggles and argu- 
ments during supervision. 

As mentioned by Quenk and Quenk (1996) in their 
review of the research in this area, there is little if any 
attention paid to demonstrating whether knowledge of type 
is useful to supervisors and supervisees in learning to be 
therapists or in thc conduct of psychotherapy. A recent 
research eflort, however, reports on a systematic effort to 
include training about type in a clinical program. Although 
the program was a social work curriculum rather than clini- 
cal or counseling psychology, the model described could be 
readily applicable to any effort that trains professionals to 
treat client populations. Moorc, Dictz, and Jenkins (1997) 
reported on their attempt to incorporate awareness of type 
by faculty and students throughout the social work curricu- 
lum. The MBTI was incorporated into a number of courses 
with the goal of increasing student self-awareness and ap- 
preciation of personality diversity as preparation for their 
future work with clients. This program extended over an 
eight-year period. One group ol 44 senior social work stu- 
dents were asked to rate the potential utility of the MBTI in 
social work practice. There was general agreement on its 
usefulness in helping relationships with clients and co- 
workers, awareness of personal strengths and limitations, 
increasing sclf-awareness, understanding clients and co- 
workers, and understanding bchavioral differences. 

The MBTI was one of the instruments used in a counsel- 
ing project that involved 50 midlife women who described 
themselves as being in personal and career transition and 
participated in an eight-week individual and group counsel- 
ing project (Schadt, 1997). A control group of women on a 
waiting list for the program were compared on their results 
on the MBTI as well as on the Bem Sex Role Inventory, the 
Strong Interest Inventory, and other scales designed to mea- 
sure wcll-being, self-efficacy, and self-esteem. Among the 
results supporting the effectiveness of the treatment pro- 
gram was the general agreement on the part of study partici- 
pants—whose type distribution showed higher percentages 
of E (6496) versus 1, N (6296) versus S, F (6896) versus T, and 
J (68%) versus P—on the value of the MBTI instrument in 
self-understanding. In addition, a significant correlation was 
found between subjects clarity of preference for either E or | 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 249 





and psychosocial well-being (r = .39, p &lt; .05) and sell- 
esteem (r = .49, p &lt; 01). Replication ol this association and 
its implications seems warranted. 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Counseling and 
Psychotherapy Settings 


In addition to the general issues and guidclines for adminis- 
tration and interpretation covered in Chapters 5 and 6, the 
following issues are particularly relevant for counseling and 
psychotherapy clients. 


Questions About Administering the MBTI 


This section addresses administration issues regarding indi- 
vidual clients, couples, families, and those in addiction 
treatment programs. 


1. What factors should 1 consider in the timing of 
administration? 
Factors such as presenting complaint, level of stress 
being experienced, anticipated client. interest and 
receptivity, and reading and comprehension level, 
among other variables, should be considered in decid- 
ing when to administer the MBII. Some therapists find 
it helpful to introduce type early in the process; others 
prefer to wait until they have a sense of the clients 
type before administering the Indicator. Many thera- 
pists decide on the timing of administration based on 
a variety ol client diflerences. With some clients, giv- 
ing the Indicator may not be appropriate or helpful 
at any stage of the counseling process. Clients with 
very serious psychological disturbances may not be 
able or willing to respond candidly to the Indicator 
questions. For example, somconc diagnosed with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder may have great diffi- 
culty making the choices required on the MBTI, result- 
ing in both increased emotional distress and invalid 
results. In spite of such caveats, however, a typc-awarc 
practitioner can use her or his sensitivity to type issues 
to help many such clients for whom the usual route of 
self-reporting on the MBTI may not be an option. 

2. What special approaches are appropriate for cou- 
ples and families? 
When using the Indicator with couples and families, 
administration carly in thc counseling process, even 
as “homework” after an initial session, can be useful 
and advisable, provided there is sufficient confidence 
that Indicator results will not become just another 
way lor the couple or other family members to attack 
and disparage each other. When there are signs that 
the MBTI is likely to be used only for destructive pur- 
poses, administration at any time is ill-advised. 


50 


The Uses of Type 


Many couples therapists have clients fill out the 
Indicator twice, once for themselves and a second 
time the wav they believe the partner would answer. 
Couple members should be discouraged from eom- 
paring their responses while answering or belore an 
interpretation session. If Form J or K is being used, it 
is advisable that Form M be used for the second, "the 
way your partner would answer," administration. The 
detailed information provided by the longer form is 
not useful when the issue is the partners’ pereeptions 
of each others whole type. It is also advisable that the 
request to fill out the MBTI occur with both people 
present, rather than at the individual sessions a thera- 
pist may schedule in order to obtain individual back- 
ground information. 


. Which form should I use? 


The Step I standard Form M, or the earlier Form G, 
can be used for individuals or eouples. Form K or 
Form J can also be helpful for both individual clients 
and couples; the individualized information these 
forms produce may aid both client and therapist in 
the treatment proeess. For information about admin- 
istration and interpretation of these forms, see Saun- 
ders (1987, 1989), Kummerow and Quenk (1992), 
Quenk and Kummerow (1996), and Mitchell with 
Quenk and Kummerow (1997). 

When treating families, the Murphy-Meisgeier Type 
Indicator for Children (MMTIC), briefly discussed in 
Chapter 5, provides type information for children 
who range in age from about 7 to 12. However, eon- 
sideration should be given to administering Form M 
or Form G to children who are 12 or older. 


. Where should the MBTI be administered? 


Depending on a variety of situational factors, some 
counselors prefer to have clients fill out the Indicator 
within the counseling setting, while others give 
clients the question booklet and answer sheet to 
return either by mail or at the next seheduled session. 
Filling out the MBII *on site" provides a common 
setting and ensures return of the materials; having 
clients respond at home on their own time may 
encourage more spontaneous responses but also runs 
the risk of extraneous influences and delay or failure 
to return materials. 


. Are there any special eautions I should be aware of? 


[n introducing the Indicator to individuals who have 
come because of psychological difficulties, special 
attention should be given to possible concerns that it 
may reveal psychopathology and/or that the client's 
responses will reveal “unconscious” or other informa- 
tion of a negative nature. It is useful to explain that 
the purpose of having type information is to enable 
better understanding of the clients natural and com- 
fortable way of operating and the ways the client may 
be similar to and different from others. Knowledge of 


type can also help both client and therapist better 
understand what is difficult and stressful for the 
client, how he or she typically reaets 10 stress, and 
which coping strategies are likely to be most natural 
and effective for the individual. 

The Indicator should not be administered to clients 
in an acute state, including those suffering from 
extreme depression or anxiety, in an ongoing life eri- 
sis, or experiencing any type of extreme emotion that 
is induced by aleohol or drug use. Administration 
should be delayed until the counselor is confident that 
the elient can respond as his or her “typical” self. 


Questions About Interpreting 
the MBTI and Verifying Type 


On rare occasions, a client who has taken the MBTI inven- 
tory may be uninterested in knowing the results or the ther- 
apist may feel that MBTI information is unlikely to be 
appropriate or helpful. In general, however, clients are 
eager to have their results interpreted and interested in the 
implications of their personality type for counseling and 
psychotherapy. 


1. What is the first step in interpreting the MBTI to 
elients? 
When type theory is used in counseling, the first step is 
to discover the clients true or best-fit preferences. The 
theory behind the MBTI assumes that preferences are 
inborn and ean become distorted and confused by fam- 
ily and other environmental pressures. Therefore, each 
stage of interpreting the MBTI results is essentially a 
testing of the reported or hypothesized type against the 
respondents experiences of his or her behavior. Refer 
to Chapter 6 for ways respondents can use the MBTI to 
indicate their inherent preferences. 

Positive insights can come from an awareness of 
type distributions in the general population (see the 
"Uses" chapters in Part V) and of how the client may 
be different from family and peer groups. The Intu- 
itive type who discovers that everyone else in his or 
her family of origin prefers Sensing gains a new per- 
spective about having always felt like an outsider. An 
Extraverted Intuitive type in a career attractive to 
Introverted Sensing types can realize why work is 
fatiguing and unsatisfying (see career choice informa- 
tion in Chapter 12). 

Clients who have correctly reported their prefer- 
ences will usually show a sense of release when read- 
ing their type descriptions. Such clients will naturally 
anticipate many of the consequences of their type and 
will readily discuss the negative aspects of their type 
in a nondelensive way. They see the negative aspeets 
as simply the opposite side of their strengths. 

Isabel Myers believed that environmental pres- 
sures were important in determining the likelihood 


P 





of optimum type development. Causes of distortion 
of type are described in Chapter 6 and in Gifts Differ- 
ing (Myers with Myers, 1980/1995, pp. 189-192). 
Both Jung (1921/1971, p. 548) and Myers with Myers 
(1980/1995, p. 189) wrote that when external influ- 
ences cause distortion of type, emotional difficulties 
will follow. Practitioners are therefore advised to exer- 
cise caution and carefully check with their clients and 
with their own observations of their clients for evi- 
dence of tvpe distortion. This is particularly impor- 
tant in counseling because a goal of treatment is to 
identify and strengthen the inherent preferences, not 
continue and reinforce the distortion. 


. How do 1 help my clients determine their best-fit 


preferences? 

lf the client has doubts about the accuracy of the 
reported preference, be alert to his or her tone when 
discussing activities. Activities associated with nat- 
ural preferences are usually described with pleasure 
or with an offhanded manner, taking them for 
granted. When clients engage in these activities, they 
feel motivated and energetic. Activities associated 
with less-preferred functions are often described in 
terms of effort, struggle, and discomfort. Engaging in 
such activities is tring and can be depressing. 

Usually, the clients natural preferences are recog- 
nized early in the counseling process, often in the first 
interpretive session. In some cases, one or more pref- 
erences remain in question at the end of the session. 
Therapist and client can agree to proceed with what is 
known about the clear preferences while investigat- 
ing further those that are not clear. For example, if 
Intuition is clear but there is doubt about whether 
Thinking or Feeling is preferred, discussion can 
focus on the implications of preferring Intuition. 
Between sessions, the client can observe his or her 
experience during decision making, noting which 
options occur first and which carry the most weight, 
and how decisions that turned out to be good or bad 
were made. This exercise is most useful when the 
decisions scem relatively minor, such as where to go 
for dinner or how to schedule a day. 

Depending on the purpose of counseling or psy- 
chotherapy and how long it is expected to continue, 
the process of discovering and verifying best-fit type 
can occur over an extended period of time. Exploring 
the clients type often becomes an ongoing and nat- 
ural part of the therapeutic process, with depth of 
insight and understanding increasing over time. Clar- 
ity about a clients type may occur quite late in the 
process, and in some cases, some measure of doubt 
may persist. 


Uses of Type in Counseling and Psychotherapy 251 


3. How can type dynamics be used as an interpretation 
aid? 
For some clients, doubt about best-fit type involves 
lack of clarity between Extraversion and Introversion 
and/or Judging and Perceiving. Because both of these 
pairs of opposite attitudes are necessary for determin- 
ing type dynamics (see Chapter 3), doubt about one 
or the other attitude affects which function is domi- 
nant, auxiliary, tertiary, and inferior. Practitioners 
who are sensitive to type dynamics can listen for or 
inquire about dynamic differences and use this infor- 
mation to help clients determine their type. For 
example, if the “doubt” is between ENFP, INFJ, INFP. 
or ENF] because the client is unclear about both E-I 
and J-P, the therapist can look for client characteristics 
that are associated with cither dominant extraverted 
Intuition (ENFP), dominant introverted Intuition 
(NF, dominant introverted Feeling (INFP), or dom- 
inant extraverted Feeling (ENEJ). 

Knowledge of typical expressions of the least devel- 
oped inferior function can also aid interpretation and 
identification of best-fit type. If a client clearly experi- 
ences the inferior function of one type rather than an 
alternative type, the likelihood is that the opposite ol 
the identified inferior function is the best-fit dominant 
function. For example, if the doubt is between ESF] 
(dominant extraverted Feeling) and EST] (dominant 
extraverted Thinking) and the client reports that 
under extreme stress he characteristically shows the 
signs of inferior introverted Thinking (ESFJ) rather 
than inferior introverted Feeling (ESTJ), serious con- 
sideration should be given to EST] as the best hypothe- 
sis of the clients type. Further exploration of the 
hypothesis during therapy is likely to provide addi- 
tional evidence for or against this hypothesis. 


Conclusion 


This chapter was designed to serve as a practical guide to 
using the MBTI in a wide variety of settings and with a 
broad range of clients. The goal was to acquaint readers 
with a fairly complete picture of the relevance of type to a 
broad range of areas. Of necessity, the coverage of some top- 
ics is brief, but it is intended as suggestive. Readers are 
encouraged to consult the relevant resources recommended 
as a way to increase their depth of knowledge. However, the 
most practical and fruitful way to benefit from type knowl- 
edge is through using type with clients, making observa- 
tions and informal hypotheses, and in general using a “type 
lens" as an aid to understanding the complexity and indi- 
viduality of clients seeking help. 


"i ve = 


V- w- 
= 4 

- e 
TN 

a C 

, 

LI 

s * 

- g 

. 9 


i i , 
nad: &gt; h, sw tg 
a D og € 4 
c 5:74 A O 
FP $7 uM»! EUN 
AE ee we 
bi d ' d 
"s * rf 
23 gt. add ARD CT 
ke Xu 
E zie 
= " . rm "HP 
$ qi hs MC 
57 m i un 9 
- 4. 
TL 
e. j | @ ë i 
mea i dd 
= E | » i ' 
, 
Nd ^ ec &gt; d 
«e soe ap? “oD 
e f i tur *. 5-8 
ie bsp e s oF 
e TA p s 
' 
-— 
m-241 £004 yp 
, &gt; "46 
" * 
$ « | 
LL 
» 5 LN 7 ». 9 
b4 
&gt;= a 9 
hielo 
" a 
å 
D 
i. | í 
ag 2 bf 
i HT gi 
yA å Pa 
"76 e E 
s * 
FN. ü NS a 
B. € 
a T1 uu ê 
' LI 
(V T 
2 


= — =) ——— "A 
















































pant dd aa &gt; - -— m nieces P 
xoi A nu m Qe Apad at a rim 
R "-—— | yo &gt; s t ocpv pe ames oam 
wihie tup c-Si fles | 
alit tir im" ona a cen, 
entia 5i ah Lm Se ae l 
eos cA e dci ee 
2, tr ene lica onm ow 

«i d es PAUNO 9, 760 weeg 
yi LESE fug 16e E ^ $2 n 
cal 2 sat A War depu? Chae 
hes 25 24/949 SO OA "itn M 
Aad! yw seul aou 

jepst m isis s uL any wd Ve 
rong, MB T! adsit adit Tope 
h auaa a gel) cv nn cl a 
FEQ en nus op 

T E epi 7 "amet Im x NO 








v; A ncs tub we "hun M gi. l 
en h 
m4 ; E * lut he 
3 EL yw T 
f | »4 
A1 2 3060 e Au ar UE Á 


LM 


"eo dcr wa cad | 
= "amu TUM. ine “as p tib a! à kaj 
T 5oco AA RAM EE d 

i RUF “am “on 

- Le sie 2 =e 

— ug Pa Tc pea E 

A o EE LS 
"M^ "x we uw peewee 
oy he te bow ot eee idi oud Tut 
ee Van aay +, Game B 

rni "ml Py chop yt ve 
Ap.ap ej oam aio 

‘ie »&amp; g maA AO M 


I 2 





sj hod ay * e ad fa fado 
ít dp os Pad DS mal oi uua ik 
(a bee waa ree turi 


= 


ee) ere N ‘man 
ee &gt; 
wa P IM EATE UE isl: dites 
LA yi se. zi rto gen sq? 

pa Lr As n ia "qs A a 
(tex 5 "aliu eh uet as sem Mya 
ETC UL Pat HS NA 

and A LS Vy) -—! bn on 
ouf Con at NM DN , 

a os ir io 
è d 9 ont eT, | 4 
| 4. * dr dove — . 
l C 
e ia uw 


gv os 
EXT 
Mer. P ix 


ue 
















Uses of Type in Education | | 


Working with the l6 Types 
in Education 


Characteristics of Learners 


Teachers and Teacher-Learner 
Interactions 


Academic Aptitude 
and Achievement 


Approaches to Reading, Writing, 
and Foreign Language Learning 


Using Type in Elementary 
and Secondary Education 


Using Type in Higher Education 


Type and Cultural Differences 
in Education 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Educational Settings 


Conclusion 


Revised by John K. DiTiberio 


ducators are faced with the daunting task of 

preparing students for the rapidly changing 
demands of the century ahead. Of all the applications 
of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator personality inven- 
tory, perhaps none holds greater promise than educa- 
tion for assisting our efforts to deal with social change 
in an increasingly pluralistic world. 


Throughout her lifes work, Isabel B. Myers saw in type 
theory not only a means for human understanding but also a 
catalyst for the realization of human potential. While schools 
and colleges have tended to measure aptitude and accom- 
plishment through the assessment of intelligence, Myers saw 
things differently. She wrote, “Within limits, type develop- 
ment can substitute for intelligence, because average intelli- 
gence, fully utilized through fine type development, will give 
results far above expectation. However, a serious deficit of 
type development, especially a deficit of judgment, consti- 
tutes a disability for which no amount of intelligence can 
compensate" (Myers with Myers, 1980/1995, p. 177). 

This chapter sheds light on the intersection between 
type preferences and many traditional benchmarks of suc- 
cess in educational settings, including intelligence (at least 
as measured by IQ). Education appears to be the applica- 
tion area with the greatest current volume of MBTI 
research, perhaps because Myers’ earliest investigations 
involved students in school settings. Hence this chapter is 
structured to provide research data at various levels of edu- 
cation, followed in each case by a discussion of implications 
tor the classroom. 


259 


254 The Uses of Type 


Building upon the comprehensive review of the litera- 
ture over the past decade found in MBTI Applications 
(Hammer, 1996b), this chapter also includes an updated 
discussion of some of the early research in education pre- 
sented in the 1985 MBTI Manual (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 
1985). Because most of the research to date is on separate 
dichotomies of the MBTI, a considerable portion of this 
chapter deals with the four pairs of opposite preferences. 
Studies of the 16 types in education are highlighted for set- 
tings where data are available. Occasionally studies are also 
cited that refer to the Murphy-Meisgcier Type Indicator for 
Children (MMTIC); the MMTIC manual (Meisgeicr &amp; 
Murphy, 1987) should be consulted regarding its use. 

The chapter begins with what we know about the 16 
types in education. Because type theory is dynamic, this 
section includes suggestions for responding to the subtle 
interaction of MBTI dichotomies within the whole person, 
not simply the addition of four preferences to one another. 
For educators, it may be especially instructive to examine 
patterns for the different types across the life span and thus 
to acknowledge that for children, adolescents, and adults 
ol the same type, the expression of their preferences must 
be understood in the context of their type development. 

The next section summarizes the research on character- 
istics of learners, dealing especially with learning styles, 
cognitive styles, brain patterns, and information process- 
ing, with attention to the four MBT} dichotomies one 
at a time. The characteristics of teachers and patterns of 
teacher-learner interactions are presented next, including 
both the benefits and limitations of matching learners with 
their teachers, supervisors, or settings by type categories. 

A section on academic aptitude and performance pro- 
vides an update of the discussion of early MBTI research in 
this area, including comparisons with standardized test 
data. Research findings in mathematics, reading, writing, 
and foreign language learning highlight the multiple pro- 
cesses employed hy different types to produce successful 
perlorinance. The section pertaining to elementary and sec- 
ondary education suggests how educators can take type 
into account in dealing with learning disabilities, behavior 
disorders, and gifted learners. lt also addresses school cli- 
mate issues as related to the interaction of different types of 
administrators, teachers, or counselors with students, espe- 
cially those at risk. College, university, and professional 
education settings have spawned considerable MBTI re- 
search over the decades, and the next section shows how 
students in higher education can best work to their poten- 
tial. It is followed by a section on type and cultural differ- 
ences in education. 

The conclusion ollers specific suggestions on how to 
apply Jungs type theory and the MBTI in educational set- 
tings. This section describes how to decide whether or not 
to administer a type indicator, which form of the MBTI is 
best suited to the age level and educational purposes of the 
group, ways to maximize the likelihood that individuals 





will respond to the Indicator according to their "true type," 
and ethical issues regarding uses of the MBTI in educa- 
tional contexts. One purpose ol this section is to give focus 
to the increasing enthusiasm for the MBTI as an affirming 
instrument. Another is to provide appropriate cautions on 
how to avoid stereotyping or reducing respondents to cari- 
catures. There are already too many unfortunate labels in 
education. 


Working with the 16 Types 
in Education 


The MBTI was designed to indicate not only ones separate 
preferences on each of four dichotomies but one’s whole 
type as well. Unfortunately, much rescarch on the MBTI in 
education has solely reported patterns of correlation 
between a single dichotomy and other variables. To work 
with individuals as a teacher, counselor, principal, or in 
other professional roles necessarily requires dealing with a 
whole person. Thus this section considers the results of 
studies in which patterns have been observed for the 16 
types. 

Chapters 3 and 4 are an essential resource for under- 
standing how a persons MBTI profile involves more than a 
simple addition of four preferences. From a strict linear 
point of view an EST] type and an ESF} type would appear 
to have much in common, sharing as they do three of the 
four preferences. However, the single letter of difference in 
this case involves the dominant process: Extraverted 
Thinking versus Extraverted Feeling. Such differences, as 
will be shown, can have profound implications. 

Educators, who are involved in helping to nurture the 
personal as well as the academic growth of students, can 
use the theory of good type development to assist in these 
endeavors. As Chapter 4 suggests, working with an ESF] 
student in elementary school requires a different balance 
between challenge and support than does working with an 
ESF} college student or fellow teacher. 


Summary of Research on the l6 Types 
in Education Using Form G of the MBTI 


Table 11.1 shows the results from Form G research during 
the past decade, which produced findings pertaining to 
one or more of the 16 types. The studies cover a wide 
range of activities across various levels of education. The 
results will be discussed by pairs of types sharing the same 
dominant function in the same attitude. 


ISTJ and ISFJ (Dominant Introverted Sensing) ISTJ and 
ISFJ types share in common a preference for quietly 


gathering the facts of the situation and carefully storing 
those facts for later use. For these reasons they are often 


considered the most reliable of the types. This hard- 
working orientation to life is represented by the appearance 
of ISTJs among the top four types in overall undergraduate 
grades (Schurr &amp; Ruble, 1986) and by ISFJ students being 
rated by psychologists as among those least likely to have 
trouble in school (Roberds-Baxter &amp; Baxter, 1994). Their 
steadv-as-vou-go orientation to tasks is also reflected in a 
preference by ISFJ teachers for the basal approach to 
reading instruction (Lehto, 1990) and in the fact thai IST] 
is one of the two most frequent types among industrial 
technology teachers (Lawrence, 1993). While the concept 
of creativity is often stereotyped as characteristic of those 
preferring Intuition, Jacobson (1993) found IST]s to 
possess adaptive creativity, as measured by the Kirton 
Adaptation and Innovation Inventory. The difference between 
IST] and ISF} types is indicated by their different outwardly 
focused auxiliary processes (Thinking for the former, 
Feeling for the latter). Given these patterns it is not sur- 
prising that ISFJs emerged as the second most frequent type 
among education majors in college (Grindler &amp; Stratton, 
1990) and that they also were rated high by faculty on 
behavioral skills for dealing with dental patients (Dunning, 
Lange, &amp; Adams, 1990). 


INF] and INT] (Dominant Introverted Intuition) The 
most quietly imaginative of the types, INFJs and INTJs have 
consistently appeared near the top in most investigations of 
academic achievement. Kalsbeck (1987) found them having 
the highest first semester grades in college, and Woodruff 
and Clarke (1993) reported them to be the two types with 
the highest overall college grades. INFJs have been found 
among the highest persisters in college (Rigley, 1993; 
Waymire, 1995) and among the top four types in over- 
all grades (Schurr &amp; Ruble, 1986). INTJs had the high- 
est grades among persisters in another study (Anchors, 
Robbins, &amp; Gershman, 1989) and were among the highest 
persisters at church-related colleges (Waymire, 1995). At 
one womens liberal arts college INTJs werc among the 
modal types of resident assistants (Brush, 1989). When 
junior high school students (ages 12-14) were asked to 
write about their personal future and to indicate the 
projected date of their story, INTJs identified the highest 
mean number of years projected beyond the present 
(Harrison &amp; Lawrence, 1985); the results reflect the 
description of Intuition as going beyond the immediate to 
imagine possibilities. A natural affinity for the academic 
world would seem to be indicated in the study by Elliott and 
Sapp (1988), which found INT]s to be Participant learners 
on the Grasha-Rceichmann Student Learning Styles 
Questionnaire; these learners are described as wanting to 
"learn course content” and “like to go to class” (p. 47). 


ESTP and ESFP (Dominant Extraverted Sensing) From 
Jungs theory, these types are the least likely to be patient 
with the demands of traditional academic life, given their 


Uses of Ivpe in Educauon 253 


preference lor experiencing the world directly, actively, and 
without restriction. Extraverted Sensing draws the 
individual into the fascinating world of tangible reality, to be 
heard (with the volume up), touched, smelled, held, and 
seen up close. They naturally look to the outer world to set 
the tone for what to do next, as long as the world around 
them stimulates their senses. Elliott and Sapp (1988) thus 
found that ESTP college students preferred “collaborative” 
learning (“liking to work with others”) and that ESFPs were 
“dependent” learners with “little intellectual curiosity” who 
“look to others for guidelines.” (p. +7). Holsworth (1985) 
found both ESTPs and ESFPs to be “field dependent” on the 
Group Embedded Figures Test (trusting stimuli presented 
directly to them, while “field independents” tend to 
perceive hidden patterns). Perhaps because these types rely 
on the concrete world around them, unfavorable conditions 
may sometimes lead them more than any other to do poorly 
academically, whereas favorable settings allow them to do 
well. Woodruff and Clarke (1993) found them the two 
types with the lowest overall grades in college. Anchors and 
Dana (1989) discovered that they are overrepresented 
among college students referred for substance abuse 
training. On the other hand, they were among the highest in 
another study of college retention (Anchors et al., 1989), 
and Rigley (1993) found ESFPs among those most likely to 
persist to graduation. 


ENFP and ENTP (Dominant Extraverted Intuition) 


These types have been described as the most noticeably 
enthusiastic regarding new possibilities. With dominant 
Intuition directed outwardly, they love to challenge existing 
ideas with fresh and original options and do not like to stick 
to routine. They therefore present an interesting paradox, 
since the initiative behind their dominant extraverted 
Intuition appears to breed success in some arenas and 
trouble in others. ENFPs were significantly overrepresented 
among academically talented (labeled as gifted) elementary 
students (Mills, Moore, &amp; Parker, 1996) but were also rated 
by psychologists as among the three types most likely to 
have trouble in school (Roberds-Baxter &amp; Baxter, 1994). 
ENFPs were found to be creative in innovative ways rather 
than adaptive ways (Jacobson, 1993). ENTP junior high 
students (ages 12-14) projected themselves farther into the 
future than any type except INTJ when asked to write about 
their personal futurc (Harrison &amp; Lawrence, 1985). 
However, ENTPs were also found 1o be highly represented 
both among high school students in an off-campus program 
for at-risk individuals (Hart, 1991) and among alcohol 
policy violators at one undergraduate college (Barrineau, 
1997). They were also overrepresented among those 
referred for substance abuse training at another university 
(Anchors &amp; Dana, 1989) and were among the lowest group 
for retention in college (Anchors et al., 1989). ENFPs were 
the third most frequent type among education majors 
(Grindler &amp; Stratton, 1990) and as teachers were found to 


256 


The Uses of Type 


Table 11.1 Research on the l6 Types in Education Since 1985 Using Form G 








IST] ISFJ 



























Le Second most frequent type 


Adaptively creative learners 
among education majors! 4 


One of top two types among 
industrial/technical teachers?! As teachers, prefer basal 


Among top four types for approach to reading instruction? 


college grades?3 Rated by psychologists as one of 
two types least likely to have 


trouble in school?2 


Rated by faculty as skilled in 
working with dental patients? 


ISTP ISFP 















Rated by psychologists among 
three types most likely to have 
trouble in school? 


Projected self fewest number 
of years in essays on personal 
future!4 


Frequent among high school 
students in remedia! at-risk 
program!? 


Among lowest in college 
retention? 


Among highest persisters in 


Highly represented among college?! 


male college scholarship 
athletes? 


Among lowest in college 
retention?? 


prefer the whole language approach to the basal approach in 
reading instruction (Lehto, 1990). When different types of 
teachers were asked to review a list of common student 
misbehaviors, ENFPs were least likely to consider them 
serious problems in their classrooms (Miner &amp; Hyman, 
1988). ENFPs were also the second most frequent type 
among one year's national finalists for the CASE college 
prolessor of the year (Provost, Carson, &amp; Beidler, 1987). 


ISTP and INTP (Dominant Introverted Thinking) These 
types are best known for their quiet analysis of a situation 
without being distracted by other people. They will work in 
isolation for long stretches, apparently without the need for 
breaks or to meet the social requirements of friends or 
family. It is this value for independence that may be behind 
the fact that psvchologists rated ISTP and INTP as two of 
the three types (along with ENFP) most likely to have 


graduate grades?? 





















INF) INT) 







Among top two types for 
undergraduate grades?ó 


One of two types with highest 
first-semester college grades? 





Among highest persisters at 
church-related colleges? 


Among top four types for under- 






Participant learners (learn 
course content and like to go 
to class) |! 


Among top two types for under- 
graduate grades?ó 






Among highest college 
persisters?! 





Projected self greatest number 
of years in essays on personal 
future!* 






Among highest persisters at 
church-related colleges?^ 
One of two types with highest 
first-semester college grades!? 


One of two types most fre- 
quent among resident assistants 
at a women's college$ 


Highest grades among persist- 
ers in college? 


One of two types most fre- 
quent among female student 
affairs officers? 



















INFP INTP 
















Have a general advantage in 
foreign language learning! 


Highly represented among 
college students taking foreign 
languages?” 







Most likely of the types to 
report suicidal thoughts in 
college?° 


Rated by psychologists among 
three types most likely to have 
trouble in school?? 






One of two types most frequent 
among college alcohol policy 
violators? 


Most frequent among college 
students referred for alcohol 
and drug violations?8 









Among females, more likely to 
persist in engineering school? 





trouble in school (Roberds-Baxter &amp; Baxter, 1994). ISTPs 
were also highly represented in an off-campus program for 
at-risk high school students (Hart, 1991) and among those 
least likely to persist to graduation at one college (Provost, 
1985). Similarly, INTPs were highly represented among 
college students referred for alcohol and drug violations 
(Provost, 1991). ISTPs were, however, overrepresented 
among male scholarship athletes (Chesborough, 1994). 
INTP females were more likely to persist in engineering 
school (McCaulley, Macdaid, &amp; Walsh, 1987), and INTPs 
were overrepresented among college students taking foreign 
languages (Moody, 1988). 


ISFP and INFP (Dominant Introverted Feeling) Among 
the gentlest of the types, ISFPs and INFPs are quietly, 
deeply, and personally invested in whatever they do. Be- 
cause they tend not to volunteer their reactions, others are 


Table II.I 


ESTP 


Collaborative learners! ! 
Field dependent learners!” 


Among two types with lowest 
overall college grades?® 


Frequent among college 
students referred for substance 
abuse training! 


Among highest in college 
retention 


EST] 


One of top two types among 
industrial/technical teachers?! 


Among top four types for 
college grades?? 


Most frequent type among 
school administrators !® 


One of two types most frequent 
among top 100 executive 
educators?? 


Frequently represented among 
college resident assistants? 


Least likely of the types to 
report suicidal thoughts in 
college20 


Among highest in college 
retention?? 


Highly represented among 
vocational teachers? 


ESFP 


Dependent learners!! 
Field dependent learners!” 


Among two types with lowest 
overall college grades?6 


Among highest in college 
retention? 


Among highest persisters in 
college?! 


ESF) 


Most frequent type among 
education majors! 


Among highest in college 
retention2? 


Most frequent type among 
high school officers in health 
occupations association?‘ 





ENFP 


Highly represented among third- 
to sixth-grade academically 
talented students?’ 


Innovatively creative learners!® 


As teachers, least likely to see 
student behaviors as serious 
problems?é 


Second most frequent type 
among national CASE professor 
of the year finalists? 


Third most frequent type among 
education majors in college!? 


As teachers, prefer whole 
language approach to reading 
instruction 


Rated by psychologists among 
three types most likely to have 
trouble in school?? 


Frequent among college students 
referred for substance abuse 
training! 

Among lowest in college 
retention? 


ENF} 


Rated by psychologists among 
two types least likely to have 
trouble in school? 


Frequently represented among 
college resident assistants? 


Most frequent type in 10-year 
study of college resident 
assistants !3 


Among lowest in college 
retention?? 





Uses of Type in Education 257 


Research on the l6 Types in Education Since 1985 Using Form G continued 


ENTP 


Projected self second furthest 
number of years in essays on 
personal future! 


Frequent among high school 
students in remedial at-risk 
program? 


One of two types most fre- 
quent among college alcohol 
policy violators’ 


ENT) 


Most frequent type among 
national CASE professor of the 
year finalists ?0 


Among top four types for 
college grades?? 


One of two types most frequent 
among top 100 executive 
educators?? 


One of two types most frequent 
among resident assistants at a 
womens college? 


Frequent among college stu- 
dents referred for substance 
abuse training! 


Among highest in college 
retention? 


Highest grades among persisters 
in college? 


One of two types most frequent 
among female student affairs 
officers? 


E E UUmITECE RICE AI XE a ne eee SS Se 97 73a LR 7 T7. 7 IT 073 
Source’ l Anchors &amp; Dana, 1989, “Anchors &amp; Hay, 1990. - 3 Anchors, Robbins, &amp; Gershman, 1989, Barrett, ] 989, ?Barrineau, ig Brush, 1989, We hesborongh, 1994, 


Daugherty. Fandel), &amp; Globem, 1997; °Dunning „Lange, &amp; Adams, 1990, lOp Donontsg Oxtorel 1990; LẸ Ihott &amp; Sapp, ee !2Gnndler &amp; Stratton, 1990, | 
"Kalsbeek, 1987; ? Komisin, 1992, 2'1 AWTENCE, 1993, 
Mills, Moore, &amp; Parker, 1996; “Miner &amp; Hyman, 1988; 27Moody, 1988, "Provost, 1991. "?Provost, 
1985. "Provost, Carson, &amp; Beidler, 1987; 20 1995; 32 Roherdse Baxter &amp; Baxter, 1994, echurr &amp; Ruble, 1980; Walters, Wilmoth, &amp; Pitts, 1988, 


&amp; Watson, 1990, ! 
221 ehto, 1990, 


3ówoodruff &amp; C larke, 1993. 


*Harrison &amp; Lawrence, 1985: 
23) ueder, 1986, 2*McCautley, Macdaid, &amp; Walsh, 1987: 


Brian 1991; l^ Hoffman, 1986, 


l7Holsw orth, 1985; 


Jac ‘obson, 1993, ! 


Hardy-Jones 


Ww aymurc, 1995, 


258 The Uses of Type 


often surprised when they discover how much these types 
have been affected by circumstances. INFPs have been 
found by research to have a general advantage in foreign 
language learning (Ehrman &amp; Oxlord, 1990) but also to be 
most likely of the types among college students to have had 
suicidal thoughts (Komisin, 1992). Another study of 
college students found INFPs overrepresented among 
alcohol policy violators (Barrineau, 1997). ISFP junior 
high students (ages 12-14) projected themselves the fewest 
number of vears into the future among the 16 types when 
asked to write about their personal future (Harrison &amp; 
Lawrence, 1985); this reflects the orientation of their 
dominant Feeling toward present and past loyalties and the 
value of their auxiliary Sensing for what they can directly 
witness in the moment. Type theory predicts that ISFPs will 
be those most dependent on the encouragement of the 
world around them and the least independently confident 
of their own abilities. This might help to explain their 
being among the least persistent in college in one study 
(Provost, 1985) and among the highest persisters in an- 
other (Rigley, 1993). 


EST] and ENT} (Dominant Extraverted Thinking) These 
tvpes like to control all that they ean. They are likely to 
project personal confidence, are forthright, and naturally 
take command in social or leadership situations. It is 
therefore not surprising that research continues to confirm 
ESTJs as most frequent among school administrators 
(Hoffman, 1986) and that ESTJs and ENTJs were the two 
types most frequent among the top 100 executive 
educators (Lueder, 1986). Their take-charge approach to 
the tangible world leads ESTJs to be the most frequent of 
the types among industrial and technical teachers 
(Lawrence, 1993) as well as among vocational teachers 
(Barrett, 1989). ESTJs were also least likely among college 
students to have suicidal thoughts (Komisin, 1992). Both 
ESTJs and ENTJs were among the four types with the 
highest overall undergraduate grades (Schurr &amp; Ruble, 
1986), and both were among the highest for retention in 
eollege (Provost, 1985). ENTJs also had the highest grades 
among persisters in another study (Anchors et al., 1989). 
At one college ENTJs were overrepresented among 
students referred for substance abuse training (Anchors &amp; 
Dana, 1989). But at a womens liberal arts college they were 
among the two types (with INTJ) most frequent among 
resident assistants (RAs; Brush, 1989). ESTJs were also 
overrepresented among RAs in another study (Anchors &amp; 
Hay, 1990). ENTJs were clearly the most frequent type 
among one years national finalists for the CASE college 
professor of the year (Provost et al., 1987). 


ESF] and ENF] (Dominant Extraverted Feeling) These are 
the most friendly and supportive of the types. Their mission 
in life is to make things easier for others, and they are 
natural catalysts for group cohesion. ESFJs are thus the 
most frequent type among education majors in college 


(Grindler &amp; Stratton, 1990). They were also found the most 
frequent type among high school officers in a health 
occupations association (Walters, Wilmoth, &amp; Pitts, 1988). 
ENFJs were rated by psychologists as one of the two types 
(with ISFJ) least likely to have trouble in school (Roberds- 
Baxter &amp; Baxter, 1994). They were also significantly 
overrepresented among resident assistants at one university 
(Anchors &amp; Hay, 1990) and were the most frequent in a 10- 
year review of patterns among RAs at another (Hardy-Jones 
&amp; Watson, 1990). With Feeling as a dominant process, 
these types rely on encouragement and support to do well. 
Thus, similar to the pattern for ISFPs, we find mixed results 
in college persistence for ESFJs and ENTJs. In one study 
(Provost, 1985) ESFJs were among the highest in retention 
and ENF]Js the lowest. 


Current Studies of the 16 Types in Education 
Using Form M of the MBTI 


Validation studies of Form M ol the MBTI have produced 
preliminary findings with implications for education, as 
shown in Table 11.2. 1t should be noted that subjects came 
from a wide range of respondents, most of them adults; the 
results would not necessarily be identical for students. A 
full discussion of this sample and validation studies of 
Form M may be found in Chapter 7 and the Appendix. 

Table 11.2 shows responses of the 16 types to these 
questions: “How do you spend your leisure time?"; “How 
many hours a day do you watch television?"; "How impor- 
tant are each of the following in your life?" The options 
reported here pertain to school-related activities that tend 
to be either curricular (e.g., reading, writing, appreciating 
art) or extracurricular (c.g., playing sports, watching TV, 
playing with computers or video games). The table indi- 
cates those instances in which the percentage of a type 
endorsing the option was either significantly overrepre- 
sented (I &gt; 1.0) or underrepresented (1 &lt; 1.0) compared 
with the percentage of that type in the sample overall. 
Because these preliminary studies include instances in 
which the number of subjects endorsing an option was rela- 
tively small, only cases in which the level of statistical sig- 
nificance was either p &lt; .001 or p &lt; .01 are reported. 

Most notable are differences related to a preference for 
Sensing or Intuition, especially when dominant. ISTJ and 
ISFJ types stand out largely by their underrepresentation as 
reporters of almost any kind of leisure pursuit or activity of 
stated importance in their life. Each indicated only one 
such activity as favored, along with three (for ISTJ) and six 
(for ISFJ) as significantly underreported. The reverse find- 
ing was true for Extraverted Intuitive types (ENTP, ENFP). 
Each endorsed six activities for either leisure or importance 
in their life, but in comparison they were underrepresented 
for either one (for ENTP) or two (for ENFP). Consistent 
with type theory, these results reflect the relative value for 
mixing leisure and play with learning for Extraverted Intu- 
itive types, and the contrasting concern for hard work and 


259 


Uses of Type in Education 


Table 11.2 Research on Reports of Leisure Time Preferences Pertaining to Education 
for the 16 Types Using Form M 


IST) 


* Watching sporting events: 
f= 121 


— Listening to music: | = 0.83* 
— Writing: | = 0.52* 
— Appreciating art: | = 0.49* 


ISTP 


* Playing with computers or 
video games: | = 1.39 


— Listening to music: | = 0.78* 
— Writing: | = 0.39 


ESTP 
+ Playing sports: ! = 1.79* 


EST) 
+ Playing sports: / = 1.57* 


+ Achievement/accomplishment 
very important: | = |.35* 


+ Watching sporting events: 
l= 1.20 


— Listening to music: | = 0.85 


ISFJ 
* WatchingTV 3 hrs or more 
per day: | = 1.12 
— Education/learning very 
important: | = 0.84 
— Achievement/accomplishment 
very important: | = 0.80* 


— Playing with computers or 
video games: | = 0.74* 


— Watching sport events: | = 0.69% 


— Appreciating art: | = 0.58* 
— Playing sports: | = 0.47* 


ISFP 


+ Watching TV 3 or more hrs 
per day: ! = 1.19* 

+ Watching TV for leisure: | = 1.12 

— Reading: } = 0.80% 

— Achievement/accomplishment 
very important: | = 0.74* 

— Education/learning very 
important: | = 0.67* 


— Working out/exercising: | = 0.66* 
— Writing: | = 0.52 

— Appreciating art: | = 0.50* 

— Taking classes: | = 0.49 


ESFP 


+ Watching TV 3 hrs or more 
per day: | = 1.21* 
— Reading: | = 0.83* 


— Working out/exercising: 
= 0.74 


ESF) 
— Writing: | = 0.62 


INF] 
+ Writing: | = 2.64* 
+ Appreciating art: | = 1.87 


— Watching sporting events: 
| 2 0.45 


INFP 
+ Writing: | = 2.19* 
+ Appreciating art: } = 2.13* 
+ Reading: | = 1.22* 
+ Listening to music: ! = 1.20 


— Achievement/accomplishment 
very important: | = 0.79 


ENFP 
* Writing: | 2 2.03* 
+ Appreciating art: |= |.97* 


+ Playing a musical instrument: 
[21.62* 


+ Listening to music: | = |.22* 


+ Education/learning very 
important: / = 1.20 


+ Reading: /= 1.11 
— Watching TV for leisure: | = 0.89 


— Watching TV 3 hrs or more 
per day: | = 0.83 


ENF] 
+ Appreciating art: | = 2.01* 
+ Writing: |= 1.89 
+ Education/learning very 
important: | = 1.54* 
+ Listening to music: I= 1.26 
+ Reading: / = 1.24 


— Watching TV 3 hrs or more 
per day: | = 0.66* 





INT) 
+ Taking classes: | = 2.66* 
+ Appreciating art: | = 1.78 


* Playing with computers or 
video games: / = 1.62 


* Working out/exercising: 
f= 1.57 


— Watching TV 3 hrs or more 
per day: | = 0.58* 


INTP 
+ Appreciating art: | = 2.16* 
+ Writing: | = 2.00* 


+ Taking classes, going to school: 
l= 1.96 


* Playing with computers or 
video games: | = |.67* 


ENTP 
+ Taking classes: I= 1.87 
+ Writing: | = 1.74 
+ Appreciating art: | = 1.64 
+ Playing sports: |= 1.56 


+ Playing with computers or 
video games: / = 1.48 


+ Achievement/accomplishment 
very important: | = 1.28 


— Watching TV 3 hrs or more 
per day: / = 076 


ENT) 


+ Working out/exercising: 
f= 1.69 


Note: See Appendix for a full description of the sample. N = 2,976 for “Watching TV 3 hrs or more per day”; N = 2,887 for “Educanion/learning very important"; 
N = 2,953 for "Achievemenvaccomplishment very important’; N = 3,036 for all other items. + = Index of attraction (D) indicates significant overrepresentauion 
of the type compared with those from the total sample who endorsed the item; — 


compared with those from the total sample who endorsed the item * p &lt; .001, all other items p&lt; .O1 See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


Index of auraction (D) indicates significant nnderrepresentation of the type 


260 The Uses of Type 


patient attention to areas of responsibility for Introverted 
Sensing types. 

The kinds of activities either endorsed or not endorsed 
also confirm type theory. Only NT types (INTJ, INTP 
ENTP), who tend to be both conceptual and analytical in 
focus, listed taking classes and going to school as signifi- 
cantly favored activities, even when responding to questions 
about leisure; ISFPs did not. Three Intuitive types (ENFP 
ENF], ENTP) significantly listed education and learning as 
very important, while two Sensing types (ISFJ, ISFP) did not. 
Those endorsing writing as a leisure activity included over- 
representations of all four NF types plus ENTP and INTP, 
and undcrrepresentations of IST], ISTP, and ESFJ. Appreciat- 
ing art was favorably listed for six Intuitive and no Sensing 
types; on the other hand, three Sensing but no Intuitive types 
were significantly underrepresented on this item. Only Intu- 
itive types favored reading, listening to music, or playing a 
musical instrument as leisure activities. Only Sensing types 
(ISTJ and ESTJ) were overrepresented in watching sporting 
events. Only SF types (ISEJ, ISFP, ESFP) reported watching 
three or more hours of television per day, while only Intu- 
itive types (INTJ, ENTP ENFP. ENFJ) were significantly 
underrepresented in this activity. 

Thinking-Feeling differences accounted for several 
interesting patterns. Only Thinking types with Extraversion 
(ESTJ, ENTP) significantly listed achievement and accom- 
plishment as very important, and only Feeling types with 
Introversion (ISF], ISFP. INFP) did not. Playing computer 
games drew INTP, ISTP, INTJ, and ENTP types; ISF] types 
were underrepresented. Playing sports attracted. EST], 
ESTP, and ENTP types, with ISFJ again underrepresented. 
Working out/exercising was endorsed only by ENTJs and 
INTJs; it was shunned by ISFPs and ESFPs. It appears that 
the interest in competition found in many computer games 
and sports provides the challenge needed by Thinking 
types, and even the individual challenge of working out or 
exercising seems to appeal to them as well. For sports, the 
external activity required also appears to attract Extraverts. 

Though these results came from responses to single 
items on a questionnaire, the patterns confirm what type 
theory predicts. Educators can learn much from the pre- 
ferred leisure activities of the 16 types, especially as they 
highlight traditional characteristics of curricular versus 
extracurricular activities in school settings. 


Implications for the Classroom 


3 


"Every type has its good and bad examples," wrote Myers 
(with Myers, 1980/1995, p. 173). As shown in this section, 
an understanding of dominant processes and the 16 types 
can help educators nurture the potential strengths and lessen 
the likelihood of problems among students. It appears, for 
example, that in different ways cach type may be both open 
to the encouragement of the academic environment and 
sometimes also susceptible to the absence of such support. 


Dominant Feeling types (ESFJ, ENFJ, ISFE INFP), 
according to type theory, work at their best when they care 
personally about the activity, and conversely they can feel 
unappreciated or doubt they have much to offer if they lack 
support. We thus see ISFPs among the highest in persis- 
tence in one college and among the lowest in another. At 
still another college ESFJs were among the highest in reten- 
tion and their partner ENFJs among the lowest; nationwide, 
however, both types are in high percentages among educa- 
tion majors. INFPs excel in foreign language learning but as 
college students report suicidal thoughts more than other 
types. To deal with students like these, educators can con- 
sult type theory to personalize the environment so that 
dominant Feeling types can especially feel welcomed, regu- 
larly encouraged, and challenged in areas in which they 
have natural strengths. 

Dominant Thinking types (ESTJ, ENTJ, ISTP, INTP), 
according to type theory, are least likely to be influenced 
by the ups and downs of their surrounding environment 
since they rely most on decisions made objectively. This 
tough-mindedness serves them well when they take 
charge of their environment as student and professional 
leaders in schools (true especially for ESTJs and ENTJs) or 
when they engage in careful analysis as in engineering 
(true especially for ISTPs and INTPs). Problems appear, 
however, when they do not care enough about the human 
expectations of their instructors or peers. Thus referrals 
for substance abuse include disproportionate numbers of 
ENTJs and INTPs, and school psychologists tend to rate 
ISTPs and INTPs as having adjustment problems. Again, 
type theory can help educators provide the kinds of chal- 
lenges best suited to dominant Thinking types, whether 
involving work with computers, leadership, or competi- 
tive sports. 

Dominant Intuitive types (ENTP, ENFP, INTJ, INFJ) 
seem to have the greatest advantage in education, especially 
higher education. Their attention to conceptual matters, 
theory, and broad patterns in complex material suits them 
well. Thus Introverted Intuitive types (INTJ, INFJ) consis- 
tently appear among college students with high grades and 
the greatest rates of persistence to graduation, and ENFPs 
are most frequent among academically talented children. 
Where problems occur, they tend to appear most among 
Extraverted Intuitive types (ENTP ENFP), who sometimes 
are rated by psychologists among those most likely to have 
trouble in school and who appear among college students 
referred for alcohol or substance abuse violations. It 
appears that the need for originality can lead toward cre- 
ative productivity in some school settings and to trouble- 
making in others. Again, Jung’s theory can help educators 
to adjust to the needs of each type. 

Dominant Sensing types (ESTP, ESFP, ISTJ, ISFJ) vary 
distinctly in their response to academic life. Furthermore, 
the remaining four Sensing types, for whom the preference 
is auxiliary rather than dominant (ESTJ, ESFJ, ISTP, ISEP), 


similarly differ from one another in education. Those who 
prefer to use Introverted Sensing, whether dominant (ISTJ, 
ISFJ) or auxiliary EST] ESFJ), prefer to record internally 
the facts of the situation for future reference. This more 
carcful orientation to Sensing appears to lead to high grades 
for ISTjs and ESTJs, school leadership roles for EST]s as 
students or as professionals, and high frequencies of ISFJs 
and ESFJs among education majors. 

On the other hand, those who prefer to use Extraverted 
Sensing, whether dominant (ESTP, ESFP) or auxiliary 
(ISTP, ISFP), tend to experience the tangible world more 
directly, freely, and without structure. Lacking the more 
organized internal orientation to data of SJ types, they thus 
are more affected by the ability of the teachers and peers 
around them to assist with the tasks of learning. Schools 
and colleges appear less interested in gifts of spontaneity in 
the experience of the real world. Myers’ (1962) early 
research found that SP types were most prone to drop out of 
school. The findings reviewed in this section were more 
mixed. ISFPs were least persistent toward college gradua- 
tion in one study and most persistent in another. ESTPs and 
ESFPs had the lowest overall college grades in one study 
but were among the types most likely to graduate in other 
studies. ISTPs were rated by school psychologists among 
those most likely to have trouble in elementary or sec- 
ondary school and were highly represented in at-risk high 
school groups, but they reported during interviews by 
Provost (1985) that they do better in college when not dis- 
tracted by too many extracurricular activities. 

The general lesson from both type theory and the 
research cited above appears to be that different types need 
different kinds of support and challenge. A careful under- 
standing of the dominant and auxiliary processes of each 
type can also suggest dilferent responses to different types 
when they struggle with school or college contexts. An 
ESFP facing disciplinary action, for example, is more likely 
to respond to friendly limit-setting along with active 
engagement in campus life, while an ISTP in similar trouble 
needs room to work in isolation without too many social 
demands. 

"The strengths of each type materialize only when the 
type development is adequate," according to Myers (with 
Myers, 1980/1995, p. 173). This lesson appears to apply 
not just to students but to their teachers as well. For 
example, the study of outstanding college teachers by 
Provost et al. (1987) reported the general teaching styles 
of these faculty as well as lessons they had learned over 
the years about their natural pitfalls. The quotations indi- 
cate a confirmation not only of their type preferences hut 
of the theory of type development as well. Students and 
teachers alike can thus benefit from working first from 
their natural preferred styles, which then frees up energy 
to employ less-preferred processes to overcome potential 
blind spots. 


Uses of Type in Education 261 


Characteristics of Learners 


This section highlights some of the more consistent 
research findings on each MBTI dichotomy relating to char- 
acteristics of learners. The results, summarized in Table 
11.3, show how Jungs theory, which underlies the MBTI, 
can be of powerful use in the classroom. Comprehensive 
reviews of these studies were conducted by Lawrence 
(1984) and DiTiberio (1996). What follows is a description 
of fascinating patterns that have emerged comparing cach 
MBTI dichotomy with aspects of learning styles, cognitive 
styles, brain patterns, and information processing. 


The Extraversion-Introversion Dichotomy 


A remarkable series of studies (Wilson &amp; Languis, 1989, 
1990) on brain electrical activity found for both adults and 
adolescents that Extraverts have lower internal arousal than 
Introverts under all conditions established by the experi- 
ment: eyes closed, low-level perceptual tasks, and then 
higher-level cognitive tasks (see brain map on p. 190). These 
patterns help us understand the results of other research that 
shows, consistent with what Jungian theory predicts, that 
Extraverted students have been found to prefer approaches to 
learning that arc collaborative and that they often depend on 
the external world for suggestions on how to proceed (Elliott 
&amp; Sapp, 1988). A number of studies have also found them to 
lean toward learning styles that involve active experimenta- 
tion or concrete experience and sometimes both (Gordon, 
Coscarelli, &amp; Sears, 1986; Hinkle, 1986; Luh, 1991; Penn, 
1992). Atman (1993) discovered that Extraverts had a higher 
sense of goal-directedness and willfulness (described as cona- 
tion) than Introverts, both as adults and in junior high school 
settings (ages 12-14). In contrast, Introverted students prefer 
reflective observation (Hinkle, 1986) and lecture formats 
(Fourqurean, Meisgeier, &amp; Swank, 1990). 

The implications of these findings can be useful for educa- 
tors. Extraverts work best in action and may be described as 
stimulus hungry, perhaps due to physiological characteristics 
of the brain. The hustle-and-bustle that sometimes interrupts 
the concentration of Introverts may be the needed prompt for 
Extraverts to engage their minds in learning. Introverts 
appear to do their best thinking in anticipation rather than on 
the spot; it now seems clear that this is because their minds 
are so naturally abuzz with activity that they need to shut out 
external distractions in order to prepare their ideas. They can 
and will give an answer to a teacher who demands one imme- 
diately but have better second thoughts once they have quiet 
for concentration. Conversely, Extraverts can and will quictly 
focus their attention when required, but they will be more 
inclined to do so if periods of quiet concentration are inter- 
spersed with regular doses of active engagement (preterably 
both spoken and physical) throughout the learning process. 


262 The Uses of Type 








Table 11.3 Characteristics of Learners by Psychological Type 





































Extraverts Introverts Sensing Types Intuitive Types 


















Concrete experiential learning 
style? 


Reflective observational learning 
style 15.23 


Abstract conceptual learning 
style?? 


Concrete experiential learning 
style 4. 15.22.24 
Visual learners? 


Visual learners? Learn in several ways? 


Active experimental learning 
style! 5. 20.23.24 












Abstract sequential learning 
style? 


Auditory learners? Auditory learners! 3 


: 13 : 
Learn in several ways Abstract sequential learning 


style? 


Concrete random learning 
Concrete sequential learning style? 


style? 


Collaborative learners! ! 


Dependent learners!! Participant learners! Participant learners?! 


Collaborative learners! ! 


Like projects, simulations, and Like lecture formats !? 


peer teaching? 


High conceptual level? 


II p” 
Dependent learners Holistic learners? 


Adaptive in creativity? 
High in fact retention, 
methodical study, and serialist 


learning? 


External decision makers!4 


Postconventional decision Internal decision makers!^ 


Innovative in creativity !? makers®: !2 


Field independent® !7 
Thin boundaries? 


Right hemisphere 
learners?.!6. 18,27 


High internal arousal of brain 
electrical activity28.29 


High in goal orientation? 


























Field dependent 6 !7 








High academic self-esteem 2° 

8 i Left hemisphere 
Connected knowers learners? !6. 18.27 
Low internal arousal of brain 


electrical activity28.?? 


"T Vi ive i WR 
Adaptive in creativity!’ Innovative in creativity 


Postconventional decision 
makers !2 


High in reflective judgment? 
High in goal orientation? 
High academic self-esteem?&gt; 
High in academic comfort! 


Like self-directed learning2? 












Thinking Types Feeling Types Judging Types Perceiving Types 


































Abstract conceptual learning 
style? 


Concrete experiential learning 
style23 


Abstract conceptual learning 
style23 


Concrete experiential learning 
style? 






Like structure and motivation in 
learning? 


Abstract sequential learning 
style? 


Abstract random learning 
style? 


Active experimental learning 
style!5 

Like tactile and loud noise 
learning stimulus 


Participant learners l! Dependent learners!!! Concrete sequential learning 


style? 















High in fact retention, Holistic learners? 
methodical study, and serialist 


learning? 


Participant learners !! Abstract random learning style? 


Field dependent® !7 
Thin boundaries! 


Right hemisphere learners?. !8 





High in fact retention, 
methodical study, and serialist 
learning? 


Concrete random learning 
style? 






Systematic decision makers !4 


Field independent® !7 Collaborative learners! ! 


Adaptive in creativity!? 













| bed i 13 
Left hemisphere learners? 26 Like drill and teaching games Dependent learners! ! 


Seek care ang self-care in moral | Like independent study!3 
orientation 


Adaptive in creativity!? Holistic learners? 


Left hemisphere learners? 8.27 


Seek self-justice in moral Thin boundaries !9 


' 2 High in goal orientation among 
orientation 


ez ; ive i ivitvi? : 
junior high students? Adaptive in creativity Right hemisphere learners? 27 


High in goal orientation among High in goal orientation? 


À Innovative in creativity !? 
adults 


Connected knowers? 







: : 25 : - 
High academic self-esteem Postconventional decision 


makers? 





High academic comfort! 


Soun e l Apostal &amp; Trontvent, 1989, ^Atman, 1993, ?Beyler &amp; Schmeck, 1992; *Bowen, 1990; Brown &amp; DeCoster. 1991, Canning, 1983, "Carter, 1990; *Catoe, 1992, 
?Drummond &amp; Stoddard, 1992, Ehrman, 1993, ! Elliott &amp; aud 1988; ""Faucett, Morgan, Poling, &amp; Johnson, 1995, PFonrqurean, Meisgeter, &amp; Swank, 1990; l* Gordon, 
Cascarelh, &amp; Sears, 1986, Hinkle. 1986, !®Hockersmith, 1986, ! /Holsworth, 1985; 'SHoltzman, 1989, I9Jacobson., 1993; 20} ohnson, Sample, &amp; Jones, 1988; 2l iddell, 
Halpin, &amp; Halpin, 1992; 22) nh, 1991, Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; 4*Penn, 1992: Schaefer, 1994, Shiflett. 1989; 27 Taggart. Kroeck, &amp; Escofher, 1991, ? wilson &amp; 
Languis, 1989; "wilson &amp; L anguis, 1990 





The Sensing-Intuition Dichotomy 


The S-N dichotomy has consistently related to distinct dif- 
(erences in the ways students view and respond to educa- 
tion. As examples, Sensing types have been found to like 
sequential learning (Drummond &amp; Stoddard, 1992) and in 
general favor both collaborative and dependent learning 
styles (Elliott &amp; Sapp, 1988). Their approach to creativity 
tends to be adaptive, while Intuitive tvpes are innovative, 
on the Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory ( Jacobson, 
1993). Sensing types approach learning through fact reten- 
tion, methodical study, and serialist learning (Beyler &amp; 
Schmeck, 1992). Sensing was the clearest preference among 
both students and teachers of vocational edueation in three 
studies (Barrett, 1989; Johnson, Zimmerman, &amp; Brooker, 
1994; Vollbrecht, 1991). In the 1985 MBTI Manual, Myers 
&amp; McCaulley reported data showing Sensing types as valu- 
ing concrete experience on Kolbs Learning Style Inventory, 
while Intuitive types instead valued abstract conceptualiza- 
tion. Several studies have found them to favor the left hemi- 
sphere on the Human Information Processing Survey (Beyler 
&amp; Schmeck, 1992; Hockersmith, 1986; Taggart, Kroeck, &amp; 
Escoffier, 1991), in contrast to Intuitive tvpes, who in the 
same studies favored the right. A recent review of the litera- 
ture on brain functioning and type (Power &amp; Lundsten, 
1997) confirmed these patterns and called attention not 
only to hemispheric preference but also to cerebral (favor- 
ing Intuition) versus limbie (favoring Sensing) thinking 
processes as measured by the Herrmann Brain Dominance 
Instrument. 

Intuitive types are described as holistic learners (Beyler 
&amp; Schmeck, 1992), field independent (Holsworth, 1985), 
and having thin boundaries (Ehrman, 1993). They have 
been found to score higher than Sensing types on measures 
of postconventional ethical decision making (Catoe, 1992; 
Faucett, Morgan, Poling, &amp; Johnson, 1995), reflective judg- 
ment (Bowen, 1990), and conation or goal orientation in 
adults (Atman, 1993). McCaulley and Natter (1974) dis- 
covered that a preference for independent study among 
high school students was found among Intuitive types, a 
pattern confirmed in a later study of self-directed learning 
( Johnson, Sample, &amp; Jones, 1988). They were also found 
to identify with the philosophy of alternative high schools 
(Steele, 1986). Academic self-esteem (Schaefer, 1994) and 
academic comfort (Apostal &amp; Trontvent, 1989) have been 
found to be higher among Intuitive types; however, Ham- 
mer and Kummerow (1996) suggested that these kinds of 
hndings reflect academia as it is currently constructed. 
They called attention to the equally academic value that 
Sensing types present for practical, hands-on learning. 

Many of the battles fought in education over the years may 
have been representations of a struggle for supremacy 
between Sensing and Intuition. A back-to-the-basics ap- 
proach may reflect the cry of students, teachers, or parents 
who feel inundated by innovations for their own sake. If 


263 


Uses of Type in Education 


many of these voices come from Sensing types, it is fully 
understandable that their natural strengths of methodical, 
sequential attention to the facts may have been unappreci- 
ated. In contrast, the voices of Intuitive types may have been 
the ones a generation ago calling for independence among 
learners and innovative approaches to problem solving. 

Jungs theory of opposites can help to relieve the polar- 
ization, since he wrote so insightfully (1923) about the 
subtle balance needed between the praetical and the imag- 
inative and about the dangers inherent in pitting one too 
consistently against its opposite. Type theory suggests that 
Sensing types can and will produce original ideas but usu- 
ally after first consulting what they know for sure about a 
topic. They carefully (and more slowly than do Intuitive 
students) follow each step in sequenee. Thus grounded in 
the real data, they can then produce the kind of big picture 
that does not lack in detail (as so many of the initial 
dreams of Intuitive types do). Conversely, Intuitive types 
can best learn to accumulate necessary facts if their imagi- 
nations are first allowed to roam free, without impediment 
or excessive rules. Once inspired, Intuitive types then 
have psychological energy left to fill in the missing pieces. 

Too often a Sensing student with an Intuitive teacher, 
or vice versa, may be asked to produce evidence of learn- 
ing in a manner that feels absolutely backward to them. 
The research cited in Table 11.3 suggests that Sensing 
types move first from the particular to the general, and 
Intuitive types the other way around. Both approaches are 
useful. Unfortunately neither will emerge in healthy form 
if authority figures polarize this dichotomy by insisting 
that one and only one way will work. 


The Thinking—Feeling Dichotomy 


Thinking types have been found in research to reflect a sys- 
tematic approach to learning (Gordon et al., 1986). They 
have also been described as field independent (trusting per- 
ceptions of hidden patterns among distracting stimuli), 
while Feeling types are field dependent (tending instead to 
follow their perception of the immediate stimuli themselves) 
(Holsworth, 1985). Beyler and Schmeck (1992) found 
Thinking types to prefer a faet orientation, methodical 
study, and serialist learning, and Feeling types to preler 
holistic learning. They also found Thinking types to be ori- 
ented to the left hemisphere and Feeling types to the right. 
Shiflett (1989) produced similar findings for Thinking 
types in terms of brain patterns. Approaches to moral deci- 
sion making have been found to link Thinking types with 
concerns for self-justice and Feeling types with care and 
self-care (Liddell, Halpin, &amp; Halpin, 1992). Thinking types 
were also found to score highly on goal orientation as 
adults, but Feeling types scored higher in a study of junior 
high students (ages 12-14) (Atman, 1993). 

An understanding of the Thinking—Feeling dichotomy 
can shed light on the debate about learner characteristics by 


64 The Uses of Type 


gender since it is the only dichotomy of the MBTI to pro- 
duce consistently different percentages among males and 
females. While there may certainly be gender differences 
worthy of note in education, what passes for gender may 
better be conceptualized as a type difference, as was sug- 
gested by Oxford, Nyikos, and Ehrman (1988) in their 
studv of foreign language learners. In a study of separate 
versus connected knowers, inspired by the writings of 
researchers in women’s studies, Feeling was preferred 
(along with Extraversion) more often by connected know- 
ers (Carter, 1990). 

The research cited in Table 11.3 suggests that Thinking 
types work best if approached from a systematic perspec- 
tive, emphasizing independence and a concern for justice. 
Feeling types, on the other hand, are more motivated if 
their field dependence is honored, as well as their concern 
for eare. With Thinking type students, teachers may be 
more effective by presenting logical arguments and reasons 
behind the assignments; with Feeling types teachers may be 
more effective if they establish a solidly supportive relation- 
ship first and do not shrink away if students seek reassur- 
ance in the early stages of learning. 


The Judging—Perceiving Dichotomy 


Judging types have been found to prefer learning settings 
with clear structure, motivation, drill, teaching games, and 
independent study (Fourqurean et al., 1990); sequencing 
(Drummond &amp; Stoddard, 1992); and fact retention, method- 
ical study, and serialist learning (Beyler &amp; Schmeck, 1992). 
They are also called “participant” learners, who “want to 
learn course content and like to go to class" (Elliott &amp; Sapp, 
1988, p. 47). Two studies (Beyler &amp; Schmeck, 1992; Taggart 
etal., 1991) found Judging types oriented to left hemisphere 
kinds of learning and Perceiving types to the right. Academie 
self-esteem was higher for Judging types (Schaefer, 1994), as 
was academic comfort among female Judging types (Apostal 
&amp; Trontvent, 1989). On the other hand, Perceiving types 
liked tactile learning and loud noise (Fourqurean et al., 
1990) and approaches to learning that are random (Drum- 
mond &amp; Stoddard, 1992), both collaborative and dependent 
(Elliott &amp; Sapp, 1988) and holistic (Beyler &amp; Schmeck, 
1992). They were innovative in creativity, while Judging 
types were adaptive (Jacobson, 1993). Goal orientation was 
clearest for Judging types, among both adults and junior 
high students (ages 12714) (Atman, 1993). 

The J-P dichotomy of the MBTI identifies how individ- 
uals approach the outer world, with Judging types prefer- 
ring planfulness and Perceiving types preferring the flexi- 
bility to wait and see. As the results in Table 11.3 indicate, 
Judging types like to know where they are going and when 
they will get there. They like it when teachers present a 
plan, and they tend to follow it as given. As we will see in a 
later section, this probably accounts for their higher 
grades on the whole. Perceiving types, however, like to 





march to different drummers. Compared with Judging 
type classmates, they need more room to roam without 
constraints, allowing their natural curiosity to remain 
alive. The paradox is that since they look to the outer 
world to stimulate their curiosity they also may look to 
the outer world to set guidelines for them, whereas Judg- 
ing types will set their own guidelines if no one does it for 
them. Thus Judging type teachers (who as we shall see 
tend to predominate at all levels of education) can benefit 
all students with their natural sense of closure and organi- 
zation, but for different reasons. Furthermore, teachers 
may need to be a bit more patient with the initial response 
of Perceiving type students, who may not look as out- 
wardly productive as their Judging type classmates until 
the due date actually arrives. Unless the deadline is immi- 
nent (meaning a matter of hours away, not days), there are 
so many other interesting things to experience and under- 
stand that the Perceiving types motivation to complete a 
project has not yet taken hold. 

In 1985 Myers and MeCaulley acknowledged a growing 
area of MBTI research on how students learn that deals 
with the complexity of type differences. A key example was 
the study by Eggins (1979), which investigated aptitude by 
treatment interaction with 350 sixth-grade students (age 
L1 or 12) involved in classifying animals into groups. Sub- 
jects were randomly assigned to one of three methods: (a) 
an inductive approach based on Bruners model, which had 
the least structure; (b) a didactic approach based on 
Ausubels advanced organizer model, designed to relate 
already familiar facts to new concepts; and (c) a highly 
structured linear presentation based on Gagnes model, 
which moved from concrete examples to abstract concepts. 
Intuitive type students benefited most from Bruners induc- 
tive approach. Sensing types who were also field dependent 
(as measured by the Group Embedded Figures Test) 
worked best with Gagnes structured model, while Sensing 
types who were field independent responded better to 
Ausubels approach. SJ and NJ types succeeded with any of 
the three models, while SP and NP types were significantly 
affected by the instructional design to which they were 
assigned. The findings from this study help to set the stage 
for the next section, which deals with the interaction 
between learners and teachers. 


Conclusion 


Educators have long known that learners come in various 
kinds. Unfortunately, too often they have pointed the finger 
at some kinds as deficient in comparison with their class- 
mates. The theory and research behind the MBTI shed new 
light on both the virtues and the potential pitfalls of all 
types. The data summarized in this section suggest that, 
especially pertaining to the S-N dichotomy, students and 
teachers can come to understand better the assumptions and 
needs associated with different approaches to learning tasks. 


Teachers and Teacher-Learner 
Interactions 


Learning goes on in context, and the context usually 
involves interaction not only with other students but also 
with instructors. The requirements of the curriculum and 
especially the characteristies of the teacher play a pivotal 
role, especially since hierarchy and authority are involved. 
This section reviews patterns found in MBTI research on 
teachers, their preferred approaches to teaching, and efforts 
to match teacher with learner by MBTI profile results. Most 
of the available studies deal with one dichotomy at a time. 


Teaching Style Patterns 


The following type patterns of teachers are based on a review 
ot research over a numher of years (Lawrence, 1993). 


m Teachers who prefer Extraversion like to give students 
choices and a voice in decisions, are easily attuned to 
the attention levels of their students, and have class- 
rooms with movement and noise. Introverts instead 
have quieter and more orderly classrooms and struc- 
tured learning activities and are more attuned to the 
ideas they are teaching than to students attention levels. 

m Sensing type teachers tend to emphasize facts, practical 
information, and concrete skills; keep learning central- 
ized; provide a narrow range of student choices; and 
start a sequence of questions with a request for facts, 
seeking a predictable response. Intuitive type teachers 
instead emphasize concepts, relationships, and implica- 
tions; provide a wide range of choices for students and 
encourage their voice in decisions; like to form small 
groups; expect independence and creative behavior; 
move freely around the room (especially in elementary 
or middle school settings); have movement and noise in 
the classroom; and start their questioning of students 
with an invitation for synthesis and evaluation. 

m Thinking type teachers make few comments about stu- 
dent performance, and when they do, it is from an objee- 
tive standard. They attend to the class as a whole and 
invite students in return to attend to what they (the 
teachers) are doing or saying. Feeling type teachers 
instead regularly provide both praise and criticism in 
their words and body language. They like students to 
spend time on individual work, and they move from stu- 
dent to student to assist them, often attending to more 
than one student at a time. 

m ludging type teachers set and adhere to schedules and 
have quiet and orderly classrooms. Perceiving type 
teachers, in contrast, encourage movement around the 
classroom, independent work, open-ended discussion, 
and socializing in groups, and allow students to have a 
voice in decisions. 


Uses ol Type in Education. 265 


Lawrence (1993) also reported that when students get off 
task, they do so ditferently depending on the type of their 
teacher. The result is increased. activity and noise with 
Extraverted, Intuitive, and Perceiving tvpe teachers. With 
Introverted, Sensing, and Judging type teachers, the result is 
daydreaming, doodling, or withdrawal. Miner &amp; Hyman 
(1988) found that teachers of different types define student 
misbehaviors differently. Sensing and Thinking types found 
student profanity a problem, and Sensing types also saw any- 
thing interfering with instruction as misbehavior. Thinking 
and Judging type teachers identified the most items on a list 
ot possible student behaviors as problems, and ENFPs the 
lewest. ST type teachers were tound by Amis-Reichle (1995) 
to endorse a belief system that children develop as a result ot 
external conditions around them; NF and NT teachers 
believed that children develop as a result ot internal factors. 


Matching Teachers with Learners by Type 


Efforts to match teachers with learners by MBTI profiles 
have met with mixed results at best. A full review of the lit- 
erature in this area can be found in the education chapter in 
MBTI Applications (DiTiberio, 1996). This review includes 
9 studies on matching and learner satisfaction, 6 of them 
with no statistically significant findings, and 18 other stud- 
ies on matching and learner outcomes, 9 of them lacking 
statistical significance plus another with results opposite 
the hypothesized direction. Most were doctoral disserta- 
tions, which perhaps had not been published due to the 
lack of statistical significance. But the general pattern across 
many studies deserves consideration. 

In the learning styles literature (Guild &amp; Garger, 1985) 
there is a debate among (a) those who recommend that 
teachers always attempt to match their style of teaching 
with the needs of the learner, (b) those who believe that 
learners of all styles should be challenged to meet the 
expectations of academie standards, and (€) those who pro- 
pose a combination of the two. The results of MBTI studies 
seem to confirm the latter approach. At minimum, it is clear 
that simple matching by type alone does not guarantee 
either learner satisfaction or successful outcomes. 

It appears that students may need different kinds of 
instruction at different points in their development. Some 
studies indeed found that opposite type teachers facilitated 
significant learning for the students (Donovan, 199+). Oth- 
ers found that matehing with same or similar type instrue- 
tors led to better outcomes (Walter, 1984) or greater stu- 
dent satisfaction (Cooper &amp; Miller, 1991; Lamphere, 1985). 
One study (Boyd, 1995) found that pairing students with 
teachers of the same type, while favorable overall, was less 
favorable than when one MBTI prelerence was different. In 
his discussion of rescarch on matching types in education, 
DiTiberio (1996) commented on four studies of computer- 
assisted instruction, none of which found significant differ- 
ences in outcome by type preference. The implication is that 


266 The Uses of Tvpe 


students at times need the natural support obtained from à 
teacher who speaks the same language and at other times 
may benefit from the challenge of a different type. A careful 
assessment of the students needs at any point in time is thus 
called for, rather than a rote assignment by type. Also one 
should never assume that MBTI profiles alone, for either stu- 
dent or teacher, will indicate adept performance of behaviors 
usually associated with type preferences; the MBTI only 
indicates the preferences themselves. 

Furthermore, the MBTI and its positive message about all 
types sometimes leads to an assumption that the dichoto- 
mics are simple to understand and apply. They are not. It is 
easy to overlook the complexity behind type preferences, as 
was discovered in a study by Dawson and Guy (1994). They 
sct out to design an interdisciplinary graduate course to 
appeal to Sensing types, who in earlier literature had been 
found to favor televised media in learning. The results came 
out opposite to expectation. What had been overlooked 
were variables that tended to favor Intuitive type students in 
spite of the best intentions of the researchers: three written 
assignments and a final exam in essay format; the content of 
study focusing on *Adult Years: Continuity and Change"; 
and interdisciplinary instruction from psychology, sociology, 
counseling, history, and literaturc. Furthermore, the authors 
stated that the televised segments "duplicated neither con- 
tent nor assigned readings, but expanded and enriched . . .” 
(p. 39). These findings are similar to those from a study by 
McCaulley, Godleski, Yokomoto, Harrisberger, and Sloan 
(1983) with engineering students, wherein Sensing types 
performed better when homework assignments closely 
replicated the kinds of questions asked on exams, and Intu- 
itive types performed better when they did not. Indeed, 
some of the early type research on the value of television and 
audiovisual aids (Golanty-Koel, 1978) found that Sensing 
types not only appreciate these media in learning but also 
benefit from having them repeated. 

Intuitive instructors who know type theory often find 
that when Sensing type students ask them to repeat what 
has just been said, they mean it literally. Instead, Intuitive 
types tend to paraphrase, or to say things in other words, 
which appeals to their own interest in variety and change. 
Such an approach can frustrate Sensing types, who, espe- 
cially when under stress in a new subject area, need the 
reassurance that they got it right, which lor them only repe- 
tition can bring. 


Implications for the Classroom 


The very mixed results from MBTI researeh suggest that 
matching teacher type with learner type may be too simple 
a solution. Similarly to Cornett (1983), we may conclude 
that “style matching can be strongly supported for affective 
reasons, but overall style matching produces inconsistent 
achievement outcomes" (p. 41). Barth (1980) also wrote 
that “when teachers are teaching in ways consonant with 
their own personal style and professional philosophy, both 


they and their students appear to benefit” (p. 15). These 
comments arc consistent both with MBTI research and with 
type theory, whieh encourages each individual, whether 
teacher or student, to approach interactions with others by 
first drawing on natural strengths, followed then by atten- 
tion to the needs of different others in the interaction. 


Academic Aptitude and Achievement 


In the 1985 MBTI Manual, Myers and McCaulley presented a 
comprehensive review of decades of study of MBTI profiles 
compared with standardized test results. The pattern was 
clear: Standardized tests, especially in verbal sections, tend to 
favor Intuitive types. Written language involves symbols rep- 
resenting aspects of reality. It is an entirely different phenom- 
enon to experience reality directly, as Sensing types tend to 
do naturally: to see, hear, taste, smell, and touch it. Words, 
phrases, and mathematical formulas are all at least one step 
removed from the world they are designed to represent. 


Standardized Measures of Academic Aptitude 


In research on academic aptitude in the past decade (Schurr 
&amp; Ruble, 1986; Schurr, Ruble, &amp; Henriksen, 1988), verbal 
scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) tend to be con- 
sistently higher for Intuitive types as a group and sometimes 
also for Introverts and Perceiving types; these patterns essen- 
tially replicate earlier findings (McCaulley, 1977; McCauley 
&amp; Kainz, 1974). SAT math scores tend to be higher for 
Thinking types (Gallagher, 1988), a pattern also found in 
earlier research (McCaulley &amp; Kainz, 1974). Studies using 
other aptitude instruments present similar findings. With the 
lowa Test of Basic Skills (Fourqurean, Meisgeier, &amp; Swank, 
1988) and the Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills (Lathey, 
1991; St. Germain, 1988), Intuitive type students as a group 
average higher scores than their Sensing type classmates. 
Myers and McCaulley (1985) suggested that while occa- 
sional studies show preference for Introversion, Thinking, 
and Perceiving correlating with academic aptitude, the most 
consistent patterns are found on the S-N dichotomy: As evi- 
dence, Table 11.4 shows the actual means, standard devia- 
tions, t-values, and significance levels for Sensing and Intu- 
itive types across several samples of aptitude measures. 
Samples include students from eighth grade (roughly age 13) 
through medical school. It can be seen that in every study 
and for every scale or subscale the mean scores were higher 
for Intuitive types. There were larger differences for scales 
requiring higher levels of abstract or verbal ability, and 
smaller differences for tests of more practical skills. Of the 38 
scales or subscales studied, 32 were statistically significant. 
Intuitive types are clearly favored on these kinds of measures. 
Requiring a time limit on standardized tests further 
intensifies the distinction between Sensing and Intuition. 


Table 11.4 Mean Aptitude Scores for Sensing and Intuition 


Aptitude Measure 


Junior High School Students 


California Test of Mental Maturity! 
Overall IQ 


Florida Eighth Grade Test? 
Vocabulary 
Comprehension 
Computation 
Problem Solving 
Everyday Living Math 
Everyday Living Reading 
Study Skills 


Florida Ninth Grade Test? 
Verbal 
Quantitative 
Social Studies 
English 
Mathematics #1 
Mathematics #2 
Science 


Florida Twelfth Grade Placement Test? 
Aptitude 
English 
Social Studies 
Reading Index 
Natural Science 
Mathematics 


PSAT? 
Verbal 
Mathematics 


Gates Reading Test? 
Vocabulary 
Comprehension 


Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery? 
Electrical 
Motor Mechanical 
General Mechanical 
Clerical/Administrative 
General Technical 


California Test of Mental Maturity? 


IQ 
College ond University Students 


University of Florida Freshmen and Transfers? 
Florida Twelfth Grade Placement Test 


Scholastic Aptitude Test 
Math 
Verbal 
Medical School Students 
Myers’ Longitudinal Study? 
Medical School Aptitude Test 
Verbal 
Quantitative 


General Information 
Science 


—— ti tt tt ttt eee 





Sensing 

N Mean 
118 101.3 
88 62.0 
87 62.7 
89 60.6 
89 64.0 
88 20.0 
89 38.9 
89 58.9 
p 550 
97? 57.4 
92 50.5 
92 S29 
22 56.5 
92 61.6 
92 47.8 
48 59 6 
48 53.2 
48 49.9 
48 52.3 
48 39.9 
48 61.9 
38 39.3 
38 48.6 
174 St.l 
174 53.6 
44 37.2 
40 353 
40 35.4 
40 5o» 
40 57.4 
271 | 104.0 
1.307 387.2 
56] 544. | 
558 495.4 
1,994 486.6 
1,994 506.4 
1,183 483.5 
1,992 505.5 


15.4 


SD 


14.2 


25.4 
252 
25.8 
26.5 


5.8 
25:9 


24.1 
27.1 
24.0 
24.2 
20.2. 
27.8 
25.1 


26.4 
27.8 
22.8 
254 
23.3 
24.5 


8.3 
11.6 


27.7 
27.8 


ZIT 
18.4 
20.5 
16.3 
16.3 


71.97 


86.84 
84.03 


83.8 
22:2 
88.3 
86. | 


38 
39 


124 
124 


1,487 


760 
747 


2,330 
2,330 
1,330 
2:329 


Uses of Type in Education 


Intuition 


Mean 


1122 


73:9 
72:1 
64.5 
72.6 
21.0 
40.2 
68.3 


ISA 
TRA 
71.8 
69.9 
74.7 
78.1 
70.0 


7952 
71.8 
67.| 
71.4 
64.0 
73.6 


51.4 
56. | 


677 
6/5 


48.4 
39.7 
42.8 
71.4 
70.0 


EU E 


416.9 


565.7 
540.4 


552.3 
538.6 
23.39 
550.6 


SD 


| 3.6 


29:5 
24.8 
25.8 
24.9 


4.9 
28.8 


214 
259 
25.0 
23.8 
25.2 
24.6 
25.7 


PE 
255 
28.2 
25.9 
29:9 
275 


11.6 
14.5 


27.4 
202 


257 
18.5 
16.0 
jer 
20.9 


Al HN. 


66.28 


88.42 
84.89 


933 
92.0 
94.7 
90. | 


482°" 


2.84" 
232 
94 
2.05* 
|.36 
1.47 
214° 


5:59 
4.04*** 
SIGUE 
5E 
455° 
So ae 
5.54" 


2.76" 
3.19% 
3.11* 
3.43** 
430** 
2.08" 


5.17 
2.49 


S.T 
4.03*7 


[27 
|.00 
| .64 
3.16% 
2 457 


BLISS 


11.86 


4.42" 
9.574 


242|** 
| 1.43 
15.34** 
16.75 


267 





Note: ^p c5: **p &lt;0 sme DO 


Source’ IMay, 1972, ?McCaulley &amp; Natter, 1974, *McCaulley &amp; Kainz, 1974, *McCaulley, 1977. 


268 The Uses of Type 


Sensing often operates slowly in order to be sure, and Intu- 
ition is by definition a kind of perception that involves 
flashes of insight, hunches, and quick perception through 
impressions. Neither type particularly enjoys taking stan- 
dardized aptitude tests such as the SAT or the Graduate 
Record Exam (GRE); Intuitive types are, however, more 
patient. with them. They more quickly get the gist of an 
abstractly worded sentence stem, record a possible answer 
bv trusting their hunch, and move on to the next question. 
Sensing types also have hunches hut tend not to trust them 
unless through practice they learn that these “guesses” can 
help them with timed exercises presenting a wcalth of com- 
plex material. 

Myers and McCaulley (1985) reported data from a num- 
ber of studies showing 52 correlations between either IC) (a 
traditional measure of general intelligence), SAT-Verbal (V), 
SAT-Math (M), Law Scholastic Aptitude Test (LSAT), GRE- 
Verbal (V), or GRE-Quantitative (Q) with each of the MBII 
scales. When statistically significant, the correlations were 
in favor of Introversion, Intuition, Perceiving, and some- 
times Thinking, and never in the opposite direction. How- 
ever, the significant correlation values for E-l] and J-P were 
never above .30 and were infrequently above .20 (5 out ol 
52 investigations for E-l; 4 out of 52 for J-P). When signifi- 
cant on the T—F dichotomy, 7 out of 52 investigations were 
above .20. Only the S-N dichotomy stood out: When sig- 
nificant, 23 out of the 52 investigations were above .20, 
with .47 the highest correlation value reported. 

Because of the relatively consistent pattern of signifi- 
cance for both the E-1 and S-N dichotomies on aptitude, 
Myers and McCaulley (1985) further reported mean scores 
of IN, EN, IS, and ES types for several samples on aptitude. 
The theoretical prediction that the means would rank in the 
order of IN &gt; EN &gt; IS &gt; ES was confirmed, a pattern later 
replicated by Kalsbeek (1987). Myers anel McCaulley added 
a note of caution, however: “It is important not to conclude 
that ES types are less intelligent than IN types. Scholastic 
aptitude tests measure the I and N aspects of intelligence 
particularly valued m academic work; they are not designed 
to measure the practical, applied intelligence of E and S" 
(1985, pp. 109-110). Myers (with Myers, 1980/1995) has 
also wisely noted that *Ns tend to define intelligence as 
‘quickness of understanding’ and... S types... tend to 
define intelligence as ‘soundness of understanding " (p. 59). 
Her profound discussion in those pages suggests that intelli- 
gence is a concept that goes well beyond the limited scope 
of IQ tests or SATs and that Jungs type theory and MBTI 
research have much to offer to current debates in this area. 
Back in 1962 Myers wrote of such differences as “habits of 
mind": *[T]he essential difference between IN and ES 
which is operative here is a habit of mind which produces, 
among other results, a characteristic level of interest in 
activities which suit cach type and disinterest in activities 
which do not” (p. 44). While no studies to date have com- 
pared MBTI profiles with measures of multiple intelligence, 


the words of Myers and McCaulley suggest that this would 
be a fruittul line of future investigation. 

An early study of college freshmen reported by Myers 
(1962) called attention to the influence of timed test condi- 
tions on S-N differences in academic aptitude. Mean scores 
on Termans Concept Mastery Test (CMT), an untimed mea- 
sure of high ranges of vocabulary and verbal reasoning, 
favored both Introverted and Intuitive types, as in other 
studies. But the advantage of Intuition was primarily found 
in students who also preferred Introversion. Myers reported 
that this was based “in part on the fact that Concept Mas- 
tery is untimed, so that the Intuitives’ speed is no particular 
asset, and the Introverts’ depth can be fully utilized” 
(p. 36). These findings were also discussed in Myers and 
McCaulley (1985). 

This study by Myers (1962) is one of several that have 
highlighted the influence of the clarity of preference on 
measures of aptitude. Myers and McCaulley (1985) reported 
that, with the exception of Sensing, as students’ preferences 
became clearer, average 1Q scores increased. Ihe pattern 
held true for Extraversion and Introversion, Thinking and 
Fecling, and Judging and Perceiving, but only for Intuition 
on the S-N dichotomy. At all levels of preference, Sensing 
types scored about the same on IQ. The same pattern 
regarding the preference score was also reported as it per- 
tained to achievement, with grades remaining relatively the 
same at all levels of preference for Sensing but tending to 
increase with clearer preferences for each of the other MBTI 
polarities. 


Grades and Academic Achievement 


Studies of type and academic achievement continue to pro- 
liferate, but the results appear to be the same as in earlier 
research: Judging types tend to obtain higher grades than 
Perceiving types. Apparently the need for closure and an 
organized approach to external events get results, especially 
in schools where the predominant teacher type also tends 
to be Judging. The pattern seems to be the same whether 
dcaling with high school students (Casey, 1986; Kyle, 
1985), college freshmen (Kalsbeek, 1987; Pollard, 1989; 
Provost, 1985), undergraduates in general (Anchors et al., 
1989; Schurr &amp; Ruble, 1986; Woodruff &amp; Clarke, 1993), 
specific majors (Tharp, 1992), or first-year medical stu- 
denis (Neral, 1989). Schurr and Ruble (1988), however, 
while confirming the preference for Judging, also found dit- 
ferent grade patterns in college on other MBTI dichotomies 
depending on area of study: In abstract and theoretical 
courses Introverts and Intuitive types obtained higher 
grades, but in practical and applied courses Extraverts and 
Sensing types did better. Similarly, Kalsbeek (1987) found 
that while Introversion, Intuition, and Judging each con- 
tributed to first-semester grades, college students’ grades in 
their major fields were influenced only by a preference for 
Judging. 


+ 60 INT): 







*INFJ 
+.40 INTP- 


*ENT)J 






+,20 “ISF) *ISTJ ENFJ 







EST} 


Grades (Z Scores) 
o 


—.20 


—40 


—-60  —40 3-20 015020 *40 +60 
IQ (Z Scores) 


Figure 11.1. Comparison of intelligence and Grades 
of the 16 Types in High School 


From an early study reported by Myers (1962), Figure 
11.1 translates both grades (GPA) and IQ results into stan- 
dard scores for comparison. She cautioned that to obtain 
the most accurate portrayal of the natural academic behav- 
ior of each type, the plots would have to be done at the high 
school level before dropout, self-selection, or the decisions 
of college admission committees have their effect. Thus the 
mean for each of the 16 types is plotted in this sample of 
3,503 college preparatory males from 27 Pennsylvania high 
schools. The placement of the regression line represents a 
correlation of .47 between grades and IQ scores. 

From this figure, a number of patterns can be observed: 


m Judging types have both higher mean grades and higher 
mean 1Q, and Perceiving types get lower grades than 
expected for their level of IQ. This pattern may be 
observed by noting that every Judging type but ESFJ 
appears above the line, and every Perceiving type but 
INTP appears below it. Furthermore, for every pairing of 
types with the first three letters the same, the Judging 
type has the higher average grades. 

W Intuitive types consistently obtain higher average 1Q 
scores than Sensing types. 

8 Ihe three preferences that appear to contribute most to 
success on these two factors (grades and 1Q) are Intro- 
version, Intuition, and Judging. 

m Ihe mean scores for the range of grades extends more 
than one standard deviation from top (INTJ) to bottom 
(ESFP). However, a more conservative reading would 
note that the mean grades for all 16 types fall within a 
range of less than one standard deviation above and below 
the standard score mean of zero. Thus the advantage of 
Introversion, Intuition, and Judging is a relative one. 


Uses of Type in Education 269 


ee 





*.60 


*.40 


+,20 








Grades (Z Scores) 
o 


ENFP INFP 
esFp © "ENTP 
220 EST) J4sTP 
*ESFP 
“ESTP 





l 
EN 
e 


—60 -40 4-20 Do +40 1.60 
SAT-V (Z Scores) 


Figure 11.2 Comparison of Aptitude and Achievement 
of the 16 Types in Liberal Arts 


For comparison, Figure 11.2 shows a similar distribution 
of mean scores for verbal academic aptitude (SAT-V) and 
grades for liberal arts college students. The range of scores is 
narrower than lor the high school students in Figure 11.1, 
although Introversion, Intuition, and Judging still appear to 
be favored among the types performing well on both mea- 
sures. Myers and McCaulley (1985) also called attention in 
this figure to the interesting pattern regarding the T-F 
dichotomy. While Thinking types outscore Feeling types on 
mean grades for those types appearing in the upper half of 
the sample, the reverse pattern is found in the lower half. The 
context of liberal arts seems to draw Thinking types with 
slightly higher aptitude scores than their Feeling type class- 
mates; but when grades are obtained, the advantage of 
Thinking is maintained only above the standard score mean 
of zero, below which Feeling then seems to become a favored 
preference. 

Figures 11.3 and 11.4 provide further results indicating 
the interaction of academic context with type, aptitude, and 
performance. As described by Myers and McCaulley 
(1985), these data show the patterns of 370 medical stu- 
dents using standard scores for both grades and national 
board scores (in Figure 11.3) and ratings for the same stu- 
dents later in their training by clinical faculty on both med- 
ical expertise and enthusiastic involvement in clinical con- 
tacts (in Figure 11.4). While ENFJs obtained lower than 
average grades and board scores, they became far and away 
the most outstanding performers in the clinical setting in 
ratings of both medical expertise and enthusiasm. The 
favorable grades and board scores obtained by INF] and 
ISTJ medieal students seemed not to help them particularly 
once involved in clinical rotations, since their ratings by 


270 The Uses of Type 


“INFJ 


ISF}&gt; : IST) 
ESFP* 


EST]: ENT MF ESTP 


-—-——————— mmm mun. uam Qtr eee es eee eee eee ee eee ee eee 


Z Scores: Premedical Point-Hour Ratio 





-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 
Z Scores: End of Phase Il National Board Average 


Figure 11.3 Premedical Point-Hour Ratio Compared with the 
National Board Average at the End of Phase II of 
Medical School 


faculty were barely above average on both dimensions. Six 
of the eight Extraverted types were rated high for enthusias- 
tic involvement; three of the four NP types (INFP, INTP, 
ENTP), often known as independent spirits, received low 
ratings. 

These findings are similar to the patterns reported by 
Schurr, Henriksen, Alcorn, and Dillard (1992), which indi- 
cate that standardized measures, which tend to give read- 
ings of broad academic aptitude or general knowledge, may 
not translate into competence in a chosen field of study. 
They discovered, for example, that both education and 
nursing students draw a proportionately high number of 5] 
types. While these types tend to be outscored by Intuitive 
types on both standardized aptitude and first-year grades, 
when they persist to graduation they do well and populate 
the professions of choice. 

Tables 11.5 and 11.6 show comparisons of ranks of the 16 
types for, respectively, academic aptitude and grades or class 
standing. These tables include not only the results of early 
studies reported by Myers and McCaulley (1985) but more 
rccent samples as well. Within each cell of the type table is 
listed the hypothesized rank based upon Jungs theory of 
how the various types would be predicted to perform in each 
domain. For both aptitude (standardized tests) and achieve- 
ment (grades or class standing), Introversion, Intuition, and, 
less firmly, Thinking were hypothesized to hold an advan- 
lage, as discussed earlier. The open-minded curiosity of Per- 
ceiving types lcads to a theoretical prediction of their advan- 
tage in aptitude; the concern for productivity of Judging 
types leads to the hypothesis of higher grades. 





Z Scores, Clinical Ratings: Medical Expertise 





-6 -4 -2 0 .2 4 6 
Z Scores, Clinical Ratings: Enthusiastic Involvement 


Figure 11.4 Clinical Ratings for Medical Expertise Compared 
with Clinical Ratings for Enthusiastic Involvement 
in Medical Students 


in specific samples, there was occasionally variation 
from prediction. However, across the many studies shown 
in Tables 11.5 and 11.6, type theory appears confirmed. 
With only a few exceptions IN types consistently obtained 
ranks, as predicted from theory, as the highest four types for 
both academic aptitude and grades. The four ES types never 
obtained a top-four ranking for aptitude and only twice 
(both involving ESTJ) appeared in the top four ranks for 
grades. Perceiving types tended to rank higher on aptitude 
and Judging types on achievement. 


Implications for the Classroom 


Since the MBTI and Jungs theory hypothesize that type is in 
part inborn, some rather thorny questions naturally emerge 
when we examine consistent findings on the aptitude and 
performance of eertain types. It should be noted, however, 
that even if the MBTI successfully identifies fundamental 
processes that have an innate component, biology is not des- 
tiny. All types can and do behave in varying ways, depending 
on the requirements of the situation, the opportunity to 
learn new skills, and the motivation to do so. The data 
reported on these pages should not be interpreted as an indi- 
cation of an inherent lack in any type. Instead they should 
be read as indicating that the preferred starting points for 
some types may tend to put them at a disadvantage without 
further intervention, training, support, or challenge. They 
may also suggest ways to understand the potential biases of 
educators and psychometricians who design and give 
wcight to standardized assessments of this sort. 


Note: 





Table {1.5 Comparisons of Ranks of the 16 Types by Aptitude 


IST) (11) 


College students SAT-V 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Business students SAT-M 
Auburn males ACT 
9th-l2th graders IQ 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-M 
Ball State males SAT-V 
High school males IQ 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-M 

Ball State females SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
8th graders IQ 

Engineering Students SAT-M 


ISTP (9) 


Engineering students SAT-M 
Business students SAT-M 
9ch- 12th graders IQ 
Auburn males ACT 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
High school males IQ 

Ball State females SAT-V 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-M 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 

8th graders IQ 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Auburn females ACT 


ISFJ (12) 


Auburn males ACT 
Engineering students SAT-M 
Ball State males SAT-M 

Ball State females SAT-M 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-V 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 
High school males IC) 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
8th graders IQ 

Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Business students SAT-M 
9th- 12th graders IQ 


ISFP (10) 


College students SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-M 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 

8th graders IQ 

Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-M 
Ball State females SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
9th- 2th graders IQ 
Business students SAT-M 
Auburn males ACT 


High school males IQ 


la 
RnR «O0 U1 WW BW Www GU QJ) UL) N NM c — — 


INF] (4) 


Ball Stace males SAT-V 

Ball State males SAT-M 

Ball State females SAT-M 
Auburn males ACT 
Business students SAT-M 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
High school males IQ 
9th—| 2th graders IQ 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
8th graders IQ 

Engineering students SAT-M 


No— wow 0 0 WH DBA BA WH | — — 


INFP (2) 


Business students SAT-M 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-V 
High school males IC) 

9th- 12th graders IQ 
Auburn females ACT 

Univ Florida females SAT-V 
8th graders IQ 

Ball State females SAT-M 
Ball State males SAT-M 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
Auburn males ACT 


Rank predicted by theory m parentheses; decimals indicate tied rank within the study in question 


Quantitative Findings 


Uses of Type in Education 


uem M 
OO Wii (n w w NJ NJ No N — — — = — 


CJ 
O* ON BD C^ DW Ut) UO MN MN M NY — — — 





S) 
~I 
E 


-n 





INTJ (3) 


High school males IQ 
Auburn males ACT 
Auburn females ACT 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Ball State females SAT-V 
9th- 2th graders IQ 
Business students SAT-M 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-M 

8th graders IO 

Ball State males SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
College students SAT-V 


INTP (1) 


Ball State females SAT-V 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
High school males IQ 

Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Ball State males SAT-V 

Ball State males SAT-M 
9th- 12th graders IQ 
College students SAT-V 
8th graders IQ 

Business students SAT-M 
Auburn males ACT 
Auburn females ACT 


continued 


Approaches to Reading, Writing, 
and Foreign Language Learning 


Traditional research studies employing relatively large sam- 
ples with measurable outcomes have been reported in the 
literature. They are summarized here separately for reading, 
As in other areas, quantitative research studies have emerged, writing, and foreign language learning, in that order. 
especially in the past decade, that call attention to type prefer- 
ences in the broad arena of literacy: reading, writing, and 
foreign language learning. In addition, a number of qualita- 
tive methods involving observations and interviews with 
subjects have helped to flesh out how type preferences inter- 
act with ones approach to these important tasks. 


Reading In studies of reading, the quantitative data are 
consistent and clear. As in academic aptitude and 
achievement in general, verbal fluency tends to favor In- 
tuitive types. Studies have investigated the relationship of 
type with language compctence and reading comprehension 


272 





10 
|| 
lI 
|! 


|2 
|2 
[2 
13 
13 
13 
l6 
l6 
16 
16 


Er 
| 10 
T 
| 13 
| 13 
| 13 


14 
[5 
IS 
IS 
l6 
l6 
l6 


The Uses of Type 








ESTP (13) 


College students SAT-V 
Auburn males ACT 
9th- 12th graders IQ 
Business students SAT-M 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
High school males IQ 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
8th graders IO 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 

Ball State males SAT-M 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 








EST) (15) 


Business students SAT-M 
8th graders IQ 

9th- 12th graders IQ 
Auburn males ACT 

Ball State males SAT-M 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-V 
High school males IQ 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
College students SAT-V 


|] 
[pa 
[2 
13 
|3 
14 
14 
15 
15 
15 
15 
15 
IS 
I5 
l6 


ESFP (14) 


Engineering students SAT-M 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-V 
High school males IQ 
9th- 12th graders IO 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 

Ball State males SAT-M 

8th graders IQ 

Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Auburn males ACT 

Univ Florida females SAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
Business students SAT-M 


ESF} (16) 


Auburn males ACT 

8th graders IQ 

Business students SAT-M 
9th- 12th graders IQ 
Ball State males SAT-V 
Auburn females ACT 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Ball State males SAT-M 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-V 
High school males IQ 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 




























ENFP (6) 























Ball State males SAT-M 
8th graders IQ 
Ball State males SAT-V 





2 

2 

4 

4 Business students SAT-M 
4 College students SAT-V 
5 Auburn females ACT 
6 

6 

6 

6 

7 

7 







Liberal arts students SAT-V 






Engineering students SAT-M 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
High school males IQ 

Univ Florida females SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
14 Auburn males ACT 

16 9th-I2th graders IQ 




























ENF]j (8) 
3 Engineering students SAT-M 
5.5 Ball State females SAT-V 
6 High school males IO 
6.5 Ball State females SAT-M 
7 Ball State males SAT-V 
8th graders IO 
Auburn females ACT 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
9 9th-I2th graders IO 
10 Ball State males SAT-M 
JO Univ Florida females SAT-V 
I! College students SAT-V 
12 Auburn males ACT 
Business students SAT-M 


































Note: Rank predicted by theory in parentheses; decimals indicate tied rank within the study in question. 






















NH 0 OC QQ (1 0) 0 fb RAA BW Ww = — 





ENTP (5) 
















8th graders IQ 

9th- 12th graders IQ 
Auburn males ACT 

Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-V 
High school males IQ 
Engineering students SAT-M 
Auburn females ACT 

Ball State females SAT-M 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-V 

Ball State males SAT-M 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
College students SAT-V 
Business students SAT-M 












ENT] (7) 


Auburn females ACT 
8th graders IQ 

9th- I 2th graders IQ 
Auburn males ACT 

Ball State females SAT-V 
Ball State females SAT-M 
Liberal arts students SAT-V 
Ball State males SAT-M 

Ball State males SAT-V 

High school males IQ 
Medical freshmen MCAT-V 
Engineering students SAT-M 











Business students SAT-M 
Univ Florida males SAT-V 
Univ Florida females SAT-V 
College students SAT-V 






Source: Auburn University females (N = 518): Freshmen at Auburn University (Conary in Myers &amp; MeCaulley. 1985); Auburn University males (N = 1,191). Freshmen at Auburn 
University (Conary in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); Ball state Umversity females (N = 1,553): Undergraduates at Ball State University (Schurr &amp; Ruble, 1986); Ball State University 
males (N = 1.160). Undergraduates at Ball State Urnversity (Schurr &amp; Ruble, 1986); Business students (N = 488): Wharton School students (Myers in Myers &amp; MeCaulley, 1985), 
College students (N = 611) Humanities students at Scripps College (Dunning in Myers &amp; MeCaulley, 1985); 8th graders (N = 133): Florida urban and surburhan middle school 
students (Mehane in McC aulley &amp; Kainz, 1976); Engineering students (N = 2,188): Freshmen at Cahfornia Institute of Technology, Cornell. and Massachusetts Institute of 
Iechnology (Myers in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985), High school males (N = 3,503): College preparatory students in suburhan Philadelphia (Myers in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); 
Liberal arts students (N = 3,676) Freshmen at Amherst. Brown, Dartmouth, Stanford, and Wesleyan (Myers m Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); Medical freshmen (N = 4,3247 


Undesignated medical schools (Myers in MeCaulley, 1977); 9th-12th graders (N = 458): Flonda State University laboratory school students (MeCaulley &amp; Natter, 1974); University 
of Flonda females (N = 564). Undergraduates at University of Flonda (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985), University of Flonda males (N = 741): Undergraduates at University of Florida 
Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985) 


Z8 


Uses of Tvpe in Education 


Table 11.6 Comparisons of the Ranks of the 16 Types by Grades or Class Standing 


IST) (9) ISF) (10) 


Univ Florida females College students 


Liberal arts students Ball State females high 


Business students school rank 


Engineering students Engineering students 


Ball 5tate females high Ball Stace males 


school rank Univ Florida males 


High school males Ball State males high 


Auburn males school rank 


Ball State males high Univ Florida females 


school rank Ball State females 


Ball State females High school males 
Ball State males Liberal arts students 
Univ Florida males Auburn males 
Auburn females Business students 
Medical freshmen 
9th- 12th graders 


Auburn females 


College students 
Medical freshmen 
9th—| 2th graders 


ISTP (11) ISFP (12) 


Business students Ball Stace males high 


Ball State females high school rank 


school rank College students 


College students Engineering students 


9th-12th graders Ball State females high 


Ball State females school rank 


High school males Auburn males 


Engineering students Ball 5tate females 


Univ Florida males Liberal arts students 


Medical freshmen Ball State males 


Business students 


Ball State males high 


school rank 


Liberal arts students 
Auburn males 
Ball State males 


Auburn females 
Univ Florida females 
High school males 
Univ Florida males 


GC) Ww N n2 NNN NN 


INFJ (2) 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


INT) (1) 

Ball State females high 
school rank 

Ball 5tate males Ball State females 
Business students High school males 
Auburn females Liberal arts students 
Univ Florida females 
9th- | 2th graders 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


Engineering students 
Auburn males 
Univ Florida males 


Univ Florida females 


Ball State females Medical freshmen 


High school males Business students 


Liberal arts students Ball State males 


Engineering students Auburnermeles 


Auburn males Ball State males high 
school rank 
9th—| 2th graders 


College students 


College students 
Univ Florida males 
Medical freshmen 


INFP (4) INTP (3) 


Ball State males high Univ Florida males 


school rank Ball State females high 


Ball State males school rank 


Auburn males Ball State females 
High school males 
9ch—| 2th graders 


Liberal arts students 


Auburn females 
Univ Florida males 
Medical freshmen 
9th—1 2th graders 
Ball State females 


Medical freshmen 
Engineering students 
Liberal arts students Business students 


College students Ball State males high 


Engineering students 
High school males 
Univ Florida females 
Ball State females high 


school rank 

Univ Florida females 
Ball State males 
Auburn females 


Auburn females 9th- [2th graders school rank Auburn males 


Univ Florida females Medical freshmen Business students College students 


continued 





Note: Rank predicted by theory in parentheses; decimals indicate tied rank within the study in question 


Specific aspects of reading have drawn findings on other 
MBTI dichotomies. For example, detail reading favored 
Introverts and Thinking types, and critical reading favored 
Judging types (Thomason, 1983). Thinking types performed 
better in comprehension when reading expository passages 
and Feeling types when reading narratives (Singer, 1989). 


(Hester, 1990), reported numbers of books read (Hammer, 
1985; Hicks, 1984, 1985, 1989; Levine, 1988; Moore &amp; 
Bayne, 1997), reading comprehension scores on the 
McGraw-Hill Basic Skills System Reading Test (Thomason, 
1983) and the Nelson-Denny Reading Test (Manske, 1988), 
and proofreading ability (Gordy &amp; Thorne, 1994). In every 
case Intuitive types had the advantage (except in Hammers 
study, where NF types were followed by ST second and NT 
third in number of books read). These results pertaining to 
the advantage of Intuition in reading confirm findings from 
earlier studies reported by Myers and McCaulley (1985). 


Writing Type theory also appears to be a natural tool for 
writing instructors (and for writers themselves). Some of 
the patterns of preferred writing processes lound by 
quantitative research are as follows: 


24 


The Uses of Type 


ESTP (15) 


Medical freshmen 
Auburn females 
Univ Florida females 
College students 
9th- 12th graders 
High school males 
Univ Florida males 
Ball State males 
Engineering students 
Auburn males 

Ball State females 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Business students 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


Liberal arts students 


EST) (13) 


9th- 12th graders 
College students 
Business students 
Auburn females 
Engineering students 
Univ Florida females 
Medical freshmen 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Balt State females 


Batt State females high 
school rank 


Ball State males 
Auburn males 

High school males 
Liberal arts students 
Univ Florida males 


ESFP (16) 


College students 
Auburn females 
9th- 12th graders 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


Liberal arts students 
Engineering students 
Univ Florida females 
Medical freshmen 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Ball State males 
Ball State females 
High school males 
Business students 
Auburn males 


Univ Florida males 


ESF] (14) 


Univ Florida females 
Business students 
Auburn females 

Ball State males 
Univ Florida males 
Medical freshmen 
Liberal arts students 
Auburn males 
College students 
9th- I 2th graders 
Ball State females 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


High school males 
Engineering students 


ENFP (8) 
Auburn females 
Ball Scate females 
Univ Florida females 
Business students 
9th- 12th graders 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Ball State males 
Auburn males 

High school males 
Liberal arts students 
College students 
Univ Florida males 
Medical freshmen 
Engineering students 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


ENF] (6) 


College students 
Medical freshmen 
Engineering students 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Auburn mates 

Ball State males 
High school males 
Auburn females 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


Ball State females 
Liberal arts students 
Univ Florida males 
Univ Florida females 
9th—] 2th graders 
Business students 


Note’ Rank predicted by theory in parentheses; decimals indicate tied rank within the study in question. 


Onn dà A d gU € M M 





Table 11.6 Comparisons of the Ranks of the 16 Types by Grades or Class Standing continued 


ENTP (7) 
9ch- 12th graders 


Medical freshmen 
Ball State females 
Auburn males 

Ball State males 
High school males 
Univ Florida males 
Liberal arts students 
Engineering students 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


Ball State males high 
school rank 


Business students 
Auburn females 
Univ Florida females 
College students 


ENT) (5) 


Business students 
Auburn females 

Ball State males 
Auburn males 
Liberal arts males 
Ball State females 
High school males 
Univ Florida females 
Medical freshmen 
9th- 12th graders 


Ball State females high 
school rank 


Engineering students 
Univ Florida males 
College students 


Ball State males high 
school rank 





Source Auburn University females (N = 518): Freshmen at Auburn University (Conary in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); Auburn University males (N = 1.191) Freshmen at 
Auburn University (Conary in Myers &amp; MeCaulley, 1985); Ball State University females (N = 1,553): Undergraduates at Ball State University (Schurr &amp; Ruhle, 1986); Ball 
State University males (N = 1,160): Undergraduates at Ball State University (Schurr &amp; Ruble, 1986); Business students (N = 488): Wharton School students (Myers in Myers 
&amp; MeCaulley, 1985); College students (N = 611): Humanities students at Scripps College (Dunning in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); Engineering students (N = 2,188): Freshmen 
at Cahfornia Institute of Technology, Cornell, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Myers in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); High school males (N = 3,503): College 
preparatory students in suhurhan Philadelphia (Myers in Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985); Liberal arts students (N = 3,676). Freshmen at Amherst, Brown, Dartmouth, Stanford, 
and Wesleyan (Myers in Myers &amp; MeCaulley, 1985); Medical freshmen (N = 4,324): Undesignated medical schools (Myers in McCaullev, 1977); 9th-1 2th graders (N = 513): 
Florida State University lahoratory school students (McCaulley &amp; Natter, 1974); University Florida females (N = 56+): Undergraduates at University of Florida (Myers &amp; 
MeCaulley, 1985), University Florida males (N = 741): Undergraduates at University of Florida (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). 


B As students, Extraverts prefer to choose their own top- 
ics and to read papers aloud for peer response, while 
Introverts prefer to have the tcacher lead the class (Sev- 
erino, 1989) and score higher than Extraverts both on 
composition grades and on the Test of Standard Written 
English (Schurr, Houlette, &amp; Ellen, 1986). Extraverts 
were also found to send more and longer e-mail mes- 
sages and replies in a study of computer use (Bail, 
1993). 

B Sensing types obtain higher ratings as eighth graders 
(roughly ages 12-13) in expressive writing (Vondran, 
1989) and want the teacher to lead the class (Severino, 
1989), while Intuitive types prefer to choose their own 
topics and to read papers aloud (Severino, 1989), use 
more words per sentence (Carrell &amp; Monroe, 1993), 
receive high grades on rellective papers and lower grades 
on reporting (Fisher, 1994), and tend to present an 
overview with little focus when asked for a summary 
(Held &amp; Yokomoto, 1983). 

B Thinking types obtain higher ratings in persuasive writ- 
ing as eighth graders (Vondran, 1989). They also make 
more literary judgments when asked to write an evalua- 
tion of material of relatively low quality, while Feeling 
types instead make self-references while writing about 
literary. material (Price, 1993). Feeling types also use 
persuasion when asked to write argumentative papers 
(Fisher, 1994). 

B Judging types obtain higher ratings for explanatory 
essays in eighth grade (Vondran, 1989), and Percciving 
types obtain more average and poor ratings in technical 
writing (Held &amp; Yokomoto, 1983) and use more words 
per sentence (Carrell &amp; Monroe, 1995; Jensen &amp; 
DiTiberio, 1989). 


Foreign Language Learning In foreign language learning, 
a number of quantitative studies have indicated that In- 
tuitive and Perceiving types perform well. Moody (1988) 
found Introverted, Intuitive, Thinking, and Perceiving 
types most frequent among college students of foreign 
languages, while Oxford and Ehrman (1988) found 
Extraverted, Intuitivc, and Percciving types most frequent 
among foreign language professionals. The highest 
language aptitude scores in one study were received by 
Intuitive types (Ehrman, 1995), while Intuitive, Thinking, 
and Perceiving types obtained high proficiency in reading 
and speaking foreign languages in two other studies 
(Ehrman, 1994a; Ehrman &amp; Oxford, 1995). Sensing types 
were rated among the weakest language learners (Ehrman, 
1994b). Gautsch (1993) found that Perceiving types out- 
scored Judging types on measures of language proficiency 
regardless of the approach to instruction. Ehrman and 
Oxford (1990) reported a general language learning 
advantage for Introverted, Intuitive, Feeling, and Per- 
ceiving types. 


Uses of Type in Education 275 





Qualitative Findings 


The results of qualitative interviews have indicated differing 
processes for the various types in foreign language learning, 
writing, and reading. These kinds of studies remind us of a 
central tenet of type theory: that all types have the potential 
for competence but that their preferred processes may piu 
them at a temporary disadvantage until they can find a 
mcans (or a mentor) to assist in the transition to the unfa- 
miliar territory of new learning. 

For example, Ehrman and Oxford (1990) reported that 
Sensing types describe language learning as a gradual 
process, saying that they like to memorize. They find it frus- 
rating to have to "guess" and have a low tolerance for ambi- 
guity. In contrast, Intuitive types tend to be linguistic risk 
takers and see language learning as often an unconscious 
process. In another study (Oxford &amp; Ehrman, 1988), Intu- 
itive and Pereeiving types reported that they like to search for 
and communicate meaning (as did Introverts in another 
study by Ehrman &amp; Oxford in 1989), and Intuitive types 
liked formal model building and liked to seek out native 
speakers with whom they could engage in authentic lan- 
guage use. Affective strategies to overcome the fear of using 
the new language were most helpful to Extraverts and Intu- 
itive types, while Extraverts also liked visualization as an aid 
to learning. In another study (Ehrman, 1990), NTs were 
found to be analytical, sometimes to the point of overcom- 
plexity, and liked to build formal models in their learning. In 
contrast, SEs were not oriented to experimentation, STs pre- 
ferred specific goals and objectives and a clearly outlined cur- 
riculum, and NFs, who cited the fewest actual strategies for 
language learning, clearly rejected analysis as one of them. 

The disparity between the performance of Sensing and 
Intuitive types in many academie arenas has been narrowed 
in writing, as reported in several studies. Ferdman and 
DiTiberio (1996), for example, found that eight fifth-grade 
students (roughly ages 9-10) who had been identified by 
their previous teachers as deficient in writing were all Sens- 
ing types as indicated by the MMTIC. However, after six 
months of instruction by the first author, taking type prefer- 
ences into account, nearly all of these children expressed 
increased confidence in themselves as writers and were per- 
forming accordingly. Many of the successful type-based 
approaches to writing that had been reported among college 
students and adults in previous studies (DiTiberio &amp; Jensen, 
1995; Jensen &amp; DiTiberio, 1984, 1989) were equally useful 
for working with elementary students. These kinds of case 
studies confirm that type preferences, while possibly funda- 
mental in an inborn way, do not have to limit ones potential. 


Implications for the Classroom 


The general message from research is that effective instruc- 
tion, at least in the area of language literacy, comes from 
acknowledging multiple processes. It appears that the 


276 The Uses of Type 


MBTI and Jungs theory provide a useful model for under- 
standing the various activities, stages, and processes that 
learners go through while acquiring confidence and compe- 
tence as readers, writers, or speakers of either their native 
language or a foreign language. 


Using Type in Elementary 
and Secondary Education 


This section addresses several current issues in the educa- 
tion of different types of children at the elementary 
(roughly ages 5-11) and secondary (roughly ages 12-18) 
levels, with particular focus on gifted students, learning dis- 
abilities, and behavior disorders. It is wise to note first that 
professionals in education, whether classroom teachers or 
administrators, tend predominantly to prefer Judging at all 
levels, usually by a ratio of two to one (Diliberio, 1996; 
Lawrence, 1993; Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). Given the 
nature of schools as organizations, this is not surprising. 
There are implications of this finding when attending to dif- 
ferent processes in learning, however. Educators need to 
acknowledge both the virtues and the potential pitfalls of 
each, including, as one example, Judging and Perceiving 
approaches alike. 


Gifted Students 


A recent study dealing with learners identified as academi- 
cally talented (Mills et al., 1996) found that in using the 
Murphy-Meisgeter Type Indieator for Children (MMTIC) 
with these students in grades 3 through 6 (roughly ages 
8-11), ENFP types were disproportionately represented 
compared with their frequency in the general population. 
ENFPs were also more frequent than in an older sample 
(which used the MBTI) of academically talented students in 
grades 8 through 10 (roughly ages 13-15). Mills et al. 
found a slight gender difference, with males appearing 
more frequently as Extraverted and females as Introverted. 
Since the same criteria were used to designate these gifted 
students at the two levels, the authors questioned whether 
profiles from the MMTIC can faithfully be compared with 
those from the MBTI. The question clearly deserves further 
study and echoes Murphy's (1992) suggestion that type in 
young children should be considered in light of their devel- 
opmental exploration, not as an established set of *truc 
type" preferences. 

Nevertheless, these same preferences for Extraversion, 
Intuition, Feeling, and Perceiving have been found to char- 
acterize gifted learners in other studies, such as the one 
by Williams (1992) with students aged 7 through 19. 
Delbridge-Parker and Robinson (1989) found Intuitive, 
Thinking, and IN types to be predominant among academ- 
ically gifted junior high students (ages 12-14), and Wittig, 


Schurr, &amp; Ruble (1986) found Intuition but also Introver- 
sion and Feeling to characterize students in the honors col- 
lege at a state university. Introversion, Intuition, Thinking, 
and Perceiving were the most frequent preferences for stu- 
dents attending a national Academic Decathlon competi- 
tion (Robinson, 1994). These studies confirming Intuition 
as à process consistently favored among academically 
gifted students replicate findings reported originally by 
Myers (1962) for junior high school students. 

Because type theory posits potential strengths of all types, 
results from the MBTI or the MMTIC provide a means for 
understanding the possible contextual biases that tend to 
discriminate against otherwise very capable students. Gifted- 
ness is often defined in language that mirrors the natural 
preferences of Intuitive types. However, Robinson's (1994) 
study produced some interesting contrasts for Sensing types. 
While in the minority overall among these Academic 
Decathlon participants, ST and SP types were overrepre- 
sented in percentage when compared with samples of 
National Merit Finalists. The direct activity (for SPs) and 
compctitive atmosphere (for STs) of this medium might 
draw very capable Sensing types that other means of assess- 
ing academic strengths do not. In another interesting study, 
Chiang (1991) asked gifted learners to rate the effectiveness 
of their teachers. Extraverted, Sensing, Thinking, and Judg- 
ing type teachers were given the highest ratings. The rating 
form, however, listed the following characteristics as 
options: organization, classroom management, teaching 
skill, course impact, student participation, and rapport. 
Open-ended questions pertaining to these successful teach- 
ers received the following comments from students: “speaks 
clearly,” “shows energy and excitement,” “uses concrete 
examples,” and “presents thought-provoking ideas.” 


Learning Disabilities and Behavior Disorders 


Learning and behavior disorders have been examined in sev- 
eral studies through the lens of type. Conduct-disordered 
students were found not to vary in type preference from the 
general population of students, but emotionally disturbed 
students included higher percentages of Introverted, Think- 
ing, IJ, IB, ST, and IS types (Kelly, 1991). Students labeled 
with attention deficit disorder (ADD) did not differ by type 
from the general student body, and subsamples of ADD stu- 
dents with and without hyperactivity also did not vary by 
type (Meisgeier, Poillion, and Haring, 1994). But ADD stu- 
dents did differ from their teachers in that they included 
disproportionately higher percentages of Extraverted, Sens- 
ing, Feeling, and Perceiving types. Other studies pertaining 
to learning disabilities produced mixed results, perhaps due 
to varied criteria for determining these labels. It is clear that 
these studies deserve replication and that further links 
should be examined pertaining to a deeper understanding 
of the intersection of type with learning and behavior disor- 
ders in school settings. 


Implications for the Classroom 


Educators are likely to continue differentiating among stu- 
dents according to categories such as those just highlighted. 
Both MBTI research and Jungs type theory, however, pro- 
vide important cautions about the dangers of restrictive 
labels that favor some students to the neglect of others. It 
was perhaps with this in mind that Myers enutled her book 
Gifts Differing (with Myers, 1980/1995). 


Using Type in Higher Education 


Professionals in higher education continue to find a broad 
range of applications of the MBTI. They include investiga- 
tions into academic persistence and student retention, 
extracurricular activities, student leadership, and resi- 
dence life. 


Academic Persistence and Student Retention 


Retention in both college and professional education are 
regular concerns of campus administrators. Type differ- 
ences seem to relate to how students move successfully 
through college. For example, a study by Schurr, Ruble, 
Palomba, Pickerill, and Moore (1997) conducted a follow- 
up of students 10 years after they entered a midwestern uni- 
versity. A higher overall persistence-to-graduation rate was 
found for Sensing and Judging types, but as in previous 
research, preference for Introversion, Intuition, and Judging 
predicted their entering scores on the Scholastic Aptitude 
Test (SAT) and their high school rank, and preference for 
Judging predicted college grades. What was most notable 
from this study was the fact that persistence to graduation 
was often the result of an indirect influence of type by way 
of intermediary factors: Judging through academic and 
vocational orientations, Sensing through a vocational orien- 
tation and choice of an applied major field, and Extraver- 
sion with a collegiate orientation, defined as having a loy- 
alty to the college and valuing extracurricular life. The 
authors concluded that “high levels for some aspects of the 
total college experience can offset lower levels for other 
aspects in determining whether students will persist to 
graduation” (p. 40). 

These findings by Schurr et al. (1997) confirm the 
words of Myers and McCaulley (1985), who wrote that 
“data on academic achievement report only the end prod- 
uct of these positive or negative learning experiences. 
Because of the many and conflicting influences on learn- 
ing, correlations of personality variables with academic 
achievement are typically low" (p. 102). 

The focus of the academic and social context with which 
students interact seems to be a critical factor, especially in 
professional education. Often the types of students who are 
in the minority or whose preferences diverge from the focus 


Uses of Type in Education 277 


of the curriculum tend to drop out. This was found for 
Feeling, NE and FP types at the U.S. Naval Academy 
(Roush, 1989), NF types in engineering (McCaulley, 1990a), 
and Thinking types in nursing (Kalsbeek, 1987). Other 
researchers have conversely called attention to those types 
most likely to succeed or to persist to graduation, whose 
preferences tend to be congruent with the focus of the 
major field: ITJ in engineering (Rosati, 1997), TJ in law 
(Gilchrist, 1991), Sensing, Fecling, and Judging in family 
medicine and Sensing in obstetrics (Friedman &amp; Slatt, 
1988), Judging in dentistry (Erskine, Westerman, &amp; 
Grandy, 1986), and 5] in nursing (Schurr et al., 1992). 

Aside from professional specialties, however, the general 
atmosphere of higher education also appears to be more 
conducive to success for some types than for others. Mac- 
daid, Kainz, and McCaulley (1984) analyzed data on attri- 
tion in a 10-year follow-up at the University of Florida. IST] 
and ISFJ types had the highest rate of graduation, while 
ESTP, ENTP, and ISTP types significantly more often had 
not graduated. FJ types were likely to have graduated early 
and TP types late; NT types were most likely and ES types 
least likely to have attended graduate school. Schurr, Ruble, 
and Henriksen (1989) applied the revised admissions stan- 
dards at a midwestern university to data on students admit- 
ted previously who had successfully made progress through 
their programs; they found a significant. number of 
Extraverted and SP types among those who would have 
been denied admission by the new standards. They also 
called attention to the relatively low SAT scores of SJ types, 
who, once admitted, persisted beyond expectation toward 
graduation, in large measure due to their finding applied 
major fields that channeled their interests and energies. 

A promising line of research in higher education settings 
is represented by the work of Lynch and Sellers (1996). 
They asked students to indicate the characteristics of their 
preferred learning environments from descriptions written 
to reflect ES, IS, EN, and IN patterns. Both adult learners 
and traditional-age college students tended to prefer en- 
vironments consistent with their own type preferences. 
However, overall there was a general preference for ES envi- 
ronments, with IN environments least preferred overall, es- 
pecially for adult learners. 


Extracurricular Activities 


Type theory helps us to understand the various kinds of 
motivations and rewards that facilitate the successful move- 
ment of different types through college. It certainly appears 
to help to have found an area of study congruent with ones 
type. This may perhaps be due to a greater number of kin- 
dred spirits among ones classmates. It also may relate to the 
expectations of instructors and the curriculum. However, 
the fact that other types, albeit in smaller numbers, succeed 
in a particular discipline suggests that nonacademic factors 
may also be at work, as this section will address. 


278 The Uses of Type 


The Extraversion-Introversion Dichotomy As entering 
freshmen, Extraverts predicted that they would get involved 
in campus life, live in coed housing, and participate in Greek 
activities, while Introverts, who said they anticipated working 
while in college (Provost &amp; Anchors, 1987), obtained higher 
grades among persisting students (Anchors ct al., 1989). Even 
though Introverted and Judging types scem to persevere 
under the academic demands of college, among those who 
did persist to graduation, Extraverts were shown to have been 
helped by active involvement in campus life, while Introverts, 
particularly IP and ISTP types, said they were helped by not 
being so involved (Provost, 1985). Extraverts also tended to 
develop a sense of autonomy and purpose and mature 
interpersonal relationships (Anchors &amp; Robinson, 1992). At 
their worst, however, Extraverts were found to be frequent 
among campus judicial offenders (Griffin &amp; Salter, 1993) as 
well as among those with substance abuse records, as were 
Intuitive and Perceiving types (Anchors &amp; Dana, 1989; 
Barrineau, 1997; Provost, 1991). 


The Sensing-Intuition Dichotomy Because of the 
increasingly abstract nature of much of academic life, 
Sensing and Intuitive types vary greatly in their needs for 
extracurricular activity. Sensing type students in college 
were found to be frequent among male scholarship athletes, 
as were Thinking, Perceiving, and ISTP types (Chesborough, 
1994). Sensing types were similarly found to participate in 
athletics in general (Ruble, Mahan, &amp; Schurr, 1987) and 


to frequent college basketball games (Schurr, Ruble, &amp; | 


Ellen, 1985; Schurr, Wittig, Ruble, &amp; Ellen, 1988). As 
entering freshmen, they foresaw marriage as part of the 
college experience (Provost &amp; Anchors, 1987). Intuitive 
types, in contrast, valued the increase in individual self- 
esteem they gained by participating in an outdoor 
adventure course, as did Feeling and Perceiving types 
(Taylor, 1990). As entering freshmen, Intuitive types 
anticipated academic achievement (Provost &amp; Anchors, 
1987), perhaps assuming that college would provide the 
kinds of supports and challenges conducive to their 
preferred ways of approaching life. 


The Thinking—Feeling Dichotomy Thinking types, like 
Extraverts and Perceiving types, were found frequent 
among judicial offenders (Griffin &amp; Salter, 1993), and 
Thinking types were among those with substance abuse 
records, similar to Extraverted, Intuitive, and Perceiving 
types (Anchors &amp; Dana, 1989). Thinking types also liked to 
participate in physical activities such as basketball, track, 
and cross-country, while Fecling types preferred instead to 
participate in volleyball, softball, field hockey, and 
gymnastics, regardless of gender (Wittig, Schurr, Ruble, &amp; 
Ellen, 1994). At their worst, Feeling type college students, 
especially INFPs, were found to indicate that they had had 
suicidal thoughts significantly more often than other types 
(Komisin, 1992). 


The Judging-Perceiving Dichotomy Judging types were 
found to have higher grades among students who persisted 
in college (Anchors et al., 1989) and among scholarship 
athletes in particular (Chesborough, 1994). In contrast, 
even as they entered college as freshmen, Perceiving types 
reported that they considered the possibility of dropping 
out (Provost &amp; Anchors, 1987). Among those on academic 
probation, EP types were found the most frequent, and TP 
and INTP types were highest among thosc with drug 
violations (Provost, 1991). 


Student Leadership and Residence Life 


Student leaders, including resident assistants (RAs), tend 
consistently to prefer Judging, usually in combination with 
Extraversion and often also with Thinking (Anchors &amp; Hay, 
1990; Brush, 1989; Hardy-Jones &amp; Watson, 1990; Petty, 
1985). As seen in Table 11.1, ENFJ, EST], and ENT] types 
predominate among RAs. These patterns suggest that lead- 
ership roles in col *ge settings tend to attract the types of 
students who like to take charge ( Judging) and who bring 
noticeable energy to the activities they are engaged in 
(Extraverts). 

A number of studies have been completed on the uses of 
MBTI results as one factor in matching roommates (Carey, 
Hamilton, &amp; Shanklin, 1985, 1986; Jackson, 1985; Kals- 
beek, Rodgers, Marshall, Denny, &amp; Nicholls, 1982; 
Schroeder &amp; Jackson, 1987). The results have been mixed, 
al times identifying apparent success and at other times 
lacking significant findings. One interesting pattern that 
calls attention to the complexity of matching was seen in 
Jacksons (1985) study, which reported that identical 
matches (dominant and auxiliary the same), while success- 
ful, were superseded in terms of higher student grades by 
complementary pairings (dominant the same, auxiliary 
different). These latter findings are similar to those 
reported carlicr on teacher-student matching by type 
(Boyd, 1995), whereby matching students with teachers of 
the same type was less successful than when one MBTI 
dichotomy was different. 


Implications for the Classroom 


Type theory and MBTI results have proven to be of use in a 
wide varicty olf ways in higher education. Longitudinal 
studies such as the one by Schurr et al. (1997) reported 
above shed light on the complex way in which type prefer- 
ences interact with intervening variables before we can see 
clear outcomes. Higher education professionals who are 
concerned about retention of students may consider type 
theory as one way of understanding the students’ diversity 
of needs. 

The traditional ethic of hard work seems suited to some 
types (Introverted and Judging especially). The fact that col- 
lege and university administrators tend to favor Judging may 
tend to reinforce this pattern (DiTiberio, 1996), and these 


findings have been replicated among female deans and vice 
presidents of student affairs (Daugherty, Randall, &amp; Glo- 
betti, 1997). But other types of students appear to do better 
with active engagement in campus life (Extraverts). Still 
others prefer much less extracurricular activity (IP and ISTP 
especially). Another group appears at risk for academic pro- 
bation or other disciplinary action unless their need for 
spontaneous play can be constructively channeled (EP and 
TP types especially). A knowledge of the strengths as well as 
the potential pitfalls of each MBTI type can help determine 
the appropriate balance between challenge and support 
regarding activity and privacy (E-I), practical involvement 
and conceptual inspiration (S-N), competition and human 
connection (T—F), or structure and freedom (J-P). 


Type and Cultural Differences 
in Education 


Chapter 15 addresses the widening MBTI literature on 
cross-cultural differences by type. This section, however, 
calls aitention to studies that point to such differences in 
educational settings. Issues of diversity are of increasing 
importance as educators prepare students for the multiple 
demands of dealing with todays complex world. This sec- 
tion shows how type theory can assist in translating the var- 
ious "languages" used by different cultural groups in col- 
leges and universities, high schools, and elementary 
education. Each subsection begins with a brief report of the 
frequency of types by students’ cultural grouping, which is 
followed by a discussion of the implications for educators. 


College and University Settings 


In college and university settings, preference for Sensing 
and Thinking appears to characterize African Ameriean stu- 
dents in higher percentages than for Whites (Hill &amp; Clark, 
1993; Johnson, 1990; Levy, Murphy, &amp; Carlson, 1972). 
Samples of Black females especially tend to contain higher 
pereentages of Thinking types (Harrison, 1995; Hill &amp; 
Clark, 1993). ISTJ was found to be overrepresented and 
ENFP underrepresented among African Amerieans (Hill &amp; 
Clark, 1993). International students coming to American 
colleges were found by Fu (1992) to report better social and 
emotional adjustment if they preferred Extraversion; a pref- 
erence for Thinking was favored by those with better physi- 
cal health. 

These findings suggest either that the overall distribution 
ol types varies across cultural groups or that in order to meet 
the requirements for entering college, students from minor- 
ity groups who report preference for the practical (Sensing) 
and the logical (Thinking) survive the best. Either way, it 
would help faculty and other higher education profession- 
als, who tend to prefer Intuition, to provide a balance in 


Uses of Iype in Education 279 





their work between their natural value for the imaginative 
and the abstract on the one hand and real-life applications 
of learning. While these suggestions were made carlier in 
the chapter for underserved types in general, the recom- 
mendations may have additional implications for cross- 
cultural understanding. 


High School Settings 


[In high schools (roughly ages 15-18), Ross (1994) found 
that Extraversion predicted academic achievement among 
Blacks, contrary to findings for Whites. Melear and Richard- 
son (1994) found higher percentages of Perceiving, EP, SP, 
and TP types among high school African American males, 
while May (1992) found higher percentages of SP types 
among male African Americans in high school but not 
among females. 

Introverted, Intuitive, and Judging types have been 
found more likely to appear among students in general with 
high academic achievement at all levels. However, these 
studies of high school African Americans suggest that edu- 
cators may benefit from attending to the varied learning 
styles of different ethnic groups. Serious reflection (Intro- 
version) and structure ( Judging) can be balanced, respec- 
tively, by opportunities for physical and spoken interaction 
(Extraversion) and spontaneous playfulness or inquisitive- 
ness (Perceiving). 


Elementary and Middle School Settings 


Similar findings emerge in elementary (roughly ages 5-11) 
and middle (roughly ages 11-14) school settings using the 
Murphy-Meisgeier Type Indicator for Children (MMTIC). 
May (1992) found that SP types predominated among both 
male and female African Americans in eighth-grade stu- 
dents (roughly age 13): For males 100% were SP, compared 
with just over 30% among Whites; for females nearly 71% 
were SP, compared with 50% for Whites. Tobaeyk and col- 
leagues reported in one study (Tobacyk, Wells, &amp; Springer, 
1988) that Extraversion, Sensing, Feeling, and Judging 
described students at risk lor dropout and in another (Toba- 
cyk, Hearn, &amp; Wells, 1990) that Sensing, Thinking, and 
Judging described a similar group; nearly all the students in 
these rural junior high schools (roughly ages 12-14) were 
Alrican American. Hispanic fourth- and fifth-grade students 
(roughly ages 9-10) were found by Fourqurean et al. 
(1990) not to differ from White samples on the four 
MMTIC dichotomies. However, Rosin (1995) reported that 
Cree junior high students tended to preter SP in dispropor- 
tionate percentages compared with broader samples. 

Much has been written about the challenges Sensing 
types face as they move up the academic ladder (Myers 
with Myers, 1980/1995). The results of these studies on SP 
and SJ types across cultural groups call our attention to a 
further refinement. As especially discussed by Fairhurst 
and Fairhurst (1995), teachers can provide either concrete 


280 The Uses of Type 


structure (SJ) or concrete adaptability (SP). The results 
may redress a common oversight in instruction not only 
for different personality types but for students from various 
cultures as well. 


Implications for the Classroom 


The issuc of diversity in education is illuminated when type 
differences are taken into account. Variations among stu- 
dents, formerly characterized as the primary result of cul- 
ture or gender, may also be understood in terms of type. 
Studies pertaining to type by gender were reported in an 
earlier section on characteristics of learners, especially 
relating to the Thinking-Feeling dichotomy. Type theory 
relieves the pressure to change student characteristics that 
may be fundamental and intrinsic to the individual. The 
theory of type development further provides suggestions 
for how and when to nurture the acquisition of new skills 
and behaviors by different kinds of students. 

It is wise, however, to be careful not to stereotype stu- 
dents by culture, gender, or psychological type. Educators 
must ultimately deal with individual students, who often 
vary from others of their ethnic background, gender, or 
type. Furthermore, students must be provided not only 
support for their preferred learning styles but also challenge 
to learn skills that do not come casily and naturally. An 
appreciation of both differences and developmental needs 
can help educators to seek an optimum balance. 

lt is equally dangerous to assume that type theory can 
account for all differences, including those pertaining to 
culture or gender. It cannot. As comprehensive as Jungs 
theory may be, students and their families from various cul- 
tures can inform educators about the values they hold, the 
behaviors they admire, the beliefs they cherish, and their 
unique ways of viewing and understanding the world. 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Educational Settings 


Chapters 5 and 6 of this manual should be consulted by 
anyone intending to administer and interpret the MBTI. 
They provide standard conditions necessary for the wise 
and ethical uses of the instrument in most scttings. This 
section addresses issues of particular concern to educators, 
cach framed by a question. 


l. Is it necessary to administer the MBTI or the 
MMTIC in order to use type concepts in education? 
No, it is not. Teachers, counselors, coaches, and other 
cducators effectively make usc of type theory in a vari- 
ety of ways without having profiles for the people with 
whom they interact. The following guidelines can help: 
* Read carefully the descriptions of type dichotomies 

and the 16 types in sourees such as Gifts Differing 
(Myers with Myers, 1980/1995). 


* Acknowledge your own preferred ways of gather- 
ing information and making decisions while teach- 
ing, counseling, coaching, and so forth. 

* Notice when students, colleagues, or others with 
whom you are working do and do not respond as 
you intended to your presentation, instructions, or 
cxpectations. 

e Based on your own preferences on the four 
dichotomics, find a way to translate your inten- 
tions into language more understandable by some- 
one with an opposite preference. For example, 
Sensing teachers may lose the attention of Intu- 
itive students by too carefully repeating every step 
of an assignments instructions. If instead they first 
point to the overall goal of the assignment (the 
general theme or its purpose), the Intuitive stu- 
dents may be more likely to return to the interme- 
diary steps. Conversely, an Intuitive teacher work- 
ing with a Sensing student may need to slow down 
the explanation, carefully repeating each step in 
the same words as those used before. Usually 
through a sequential understanding of the parts, 
the Sensing type is more inclined to understand 
the end goal of the assignment. 

* Be wary of interpreting every behavior of another 
person as indicating type. Watch instead for gen- 
eral patterns over time in different settings as possi- 
ble indications of type. Students and teachers alike 
are somctimes inclined to behave according to their 
settings expectations (either real or imagined) in 
order to accommodate or to learn new skills. 


2. Do 1 need 10 take the MBTI myself in order to 


understand how to use type concepts in education? 
It certainly helps. The first step in using type theory is 
to understand how it works for oneself. The MBTI 
was designed to assist in this process and can provide 
a reliable hypothesis regarding your type. 


. Do I need special training before { can use the 


MBTI? 

Yes, you do. A college-level course in psychological 
tests and measurements, or its equivalent, is the mini- 
mum prerequisite for purchasing a Level B instrument 
such as the MBTI. The course should preferably deal 
directly with the MBTI. If not, it is recommended that 
you attend one of a number of approved MBTI training 
programs. You can get a list from the publisher: Con- 
sulting Psychologists Press (1-800-624-1765). 


4. What form of the MBTI is best for my educational 


setting? 

Reading level is the most important criterion here. 
MBTI Form M is currently the standard instrument 
for individuals with a reading level of cighth grade 
(roughly age 13) and higher. The Murphy-Meisgeicr 
Type Indicator for Children (MMTIC) has been 
designed for students in elementary and middle 
school settings with a reading level of second grade 


(roughly age 7) through seventh grade (roughly age 
12). There are also a number of translations of the 
MBTI into foreign languages such as Spanish, 
French, German, Korean, and others; see Chapter 14 
in this manual and Chapter 8 of MBTI Applications 
(Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996) for suggestions on how to 
use them. 
. A colleague told me that there are “short forms” of 
the MBTI in a number of books that are easy to 
administer to students. Can't I use one of these? 
Only to help you to read the book. In most cases the 
authors explicitly state that these checklists or ques- 
tionnaires are not expected to be reliable or valid 
assessment tools. Decades of research have instead 
gone into refining the sube wording needed to 
assess a persons type preferences on each dichotomy 
by way of the MBTI. 

. What are legitimate uses of the MBTI in working 

with students? 

The possibilities are many, but they may include the 

following: 

* To assist students to understand themselves and 
their preferred ways of going about learning, thus 
enhancing self-confidence 

* To help students working with one another to 
recognize the value of different perspectives and 
approaches to teamwork 

* To help students who face blocks in learning to 
approach such tasks by first drawing upon their 
natural strengths, thus saving energy for greater 
difficulties later on 

* [o assist fellow teachers, counselors, and other 
professionals in education to recognize differ- 
ences among students as potential sources of 
sirength rather than as impediments to learning 

* To employ the theory of type development as one 
way to understand normal transitions through 
which different types of students (and teachers) 
tend to proceed 

. What uses of the MBTI with students should be 

avoided? 

Simply recognizing that type theory and MBTI results 

can be misused can alert us to problems such as those 

indicated below. 

e Stereotyping based on MBTI profile results, as in 
assuming that a person of a certain type always 
operates in his or her preferred way. 

* Emphasizing the pitfalls of a type to the neglect of 
strengths, as in faulting the slowness of a Sensing 
types information-gathering process while ignor- 
ing the sureness and confidence that comes from 
their careful observation, or conversely in faulting 
the randomness of an Intuitive types ideas about 
an assigninent while ignoring the inspiration and 
enthusiasm that comes from their brainstorming. 


Uses of Type in Fducanon 281 





* Selecting or rejecting students (for example, for 
group participation or promotion to a higher level) 
based on type preferences, since type alone does 
not account for ones potential to contribute well 
or poorly in a given situation. Lawrence (1993) 
wisely wrote that to use the MBTI “as a screening 
device is usually fruitless and often harmful” 
(p. 92). The harm comes in treating type prefer- 
ences as barriers rather than possibilities. The 
fruitlessness may result either from falsification of 
answers to MBTI questions if the student expects 
screening is to occur or from factors beyond type 
that may affect motivation or performanee. 

* Using type preferences as an excuse or a rational- 
ization for behavior. Perceiving types, for example, 
often prefer to let impending deadlines motivate 
their completion of a project. While their preferred 
process can be respected, all types should be 
expected to complete the assignment on time 
aecording to expectation. 

* Using type preferences to manipulate others. Judg- 
ing types, for example, deserve the opportunity to 
organize their schedules to get things done. This 
does not give them the right to expect others to 
follow suit, unless official responsibilities of their 
role give them such authority. 

e Interpreting the MBTI preference clarity index as 
indication of degree of ability or lack of it. As Chap- 
ter 6 explains in depth, the preference clarity index 
indicates only the respondents clarity of preference. 
Skill, maturity, and development cannot be inferred 
from scores, either high or low. 

* Expecting type to change as the result of either 
instruction or maturity. As people gain new skills, 
knowledge, and confidence, they do not change 
into a different type. They instead become more 
diverse and well-rounded examples of their inborn 
type. 

* Imposing ones enthusiasm for type theory and the 
MBTI. Type cannot provide answers for all prob- 
lems in education, no matter how useful it may be. 
Even in those arenas where it has been found help- 
ful, other teachers, students, and administrators 
may have equally useful ways to deal with diver- 
sity in their work. 


8. What must l keep in mind while administering the 


MBTI to students? 

The following factors may either enhanee or interfere 

with your purposes. 

* The MBTI works best if completed voluntarily. 

e Because teachers, counselors, or other profession- 
als who administer the MBTI hold authority posi- 
tions, students may respond as they believe they 
“Should”: it is wise to rcad the instructions to 
them, which emphasize that there are no right or 
wrong answers to any of the questions. 


282 


The Uses of Type 


The expectations of the school, the curriculum, or 
professional standards may invite an “acceptable” 
choice, thus leading to lalsification of one’s report 
of type. 

Because the MBTI looks like a “test,” students may 
assume, on the one hand, that they have to answer 
every item carefully to get it “right” or, on the 
other hand, that they must move more quickly 
than they prefer in order to finish “on time”; the 
instructions note that respondents should go at 
their own pace, that there is no time limit, and that 
they may skip items about which thev are not sure. 
Students should be assured that their results will 
be kept confidential and not shared without their 
consent, preferably written; once they hear or read 
the positive language of their own type deserip- 
tion, most students are eager to share their pro- 
files, but thev should not feel coerced to do so. 
Profile results and feedback on their meaning 
should always be given face to face by a trained 
professional, never distributed by mail or through 
an untrained third party; respondents thus have 
the opportunity to raise questions about the profile 
and to validate personally whether it truly refleets 
their type preferences. 

Students should be encouraged to verify for them- 
selves the degree to whieh the profile fits them, 
even if their perceptions seem to contradict what 
the teacher, the counselor, or classmates think is 
true for them; other people may have misread 
prior behavior and thus may have an inaccurate 
interpretation of the students type, or the student 
may need time to digest the feedback before com- 
ing to a clearer view of his or her type. 

Sometimes students feel torn between a “school 
self” and a “home self” or even an “ideal self”: 
they should be encouraged to explore these vari- 
ous expressions of a hroader "best-fit type" (see 
Chapter 6 for more on that concept). 

Younger students may not always identify with the 
wording of some items, which may pertain more 
to adult situations; they should be encouraged to 
answer as they best understand the situation or to 
leave the item blank. 

Similarly, if students ask the meaning of a word or 
phrase they should be encouraged to answer as 
best they can or to leave it blank; words or phrases 
should not be explained. 

While generally reliable across most settings, thc 
MBTI, like all self-report instruments, may some- 
times be neither reliable nor valid for certain 
groups, such as those academically at risk or with 
low reading levels. See Chapter 8 for reliability 
data on such groups. lf the MBTI is used with 
these individuals, extra time should be devoted to 


help them explore their best-fit type beyond the 
profile results. 

* Sometimes educators bring unrealistic expecta- 
tions to the administration of the MBTI. MBTI 
results should never be used alone to determine a 
persons best ways of approaching educational 
tasks; the influence of factors such as gender, age, 
culture, personal history, curriculum, current role 
in the setting, and hierarchy should be considered. 

* The conditions for administration and interpreta- 
tion must be sufficient for the purpose for using 
the MBTI. One-hour interpretation sessions are 
never adequate for groups. Interpretive materials 
should highlight the uses of type in the educa- 
tional setting appropriate for the respondents. 
Time for questions, concerns, and skepticism 
should also be provided. The skill of the person 
administering and interpreting the MBTI may also 
contribute to the reliability and usefulness of the 
results. 

9. Statistically significant research indicates that some 
types get higher grades or aptitude scores than their 
opposites. Should I therefore expect less of some 
types? 

Absolutely not. There are three main reasons why this 

reasoning is dangerous. 

e First, it is risky to generalize from statistically sig- 
nificant research findings to all people of a type. 
Even though Judging types tend as a group to get 
higher grades than Perceiving types and Intuitive 
types higher standardized aptitude scores than 
Sensing types, you may be working with students 
whose performance belies the general pattern. 
There are many individual Perceiving types with 
the highest possible grades, as well as Sensing 
types who outperform most of their Intuitive elass- 
mates on standardized tests. 

e Next, factors in addition to a students type may 
contribute to the findings. For example, we know 
that a majority of teachers from the earliest ele- 
inentary grades through graduate school faculty 
prefer Judging; thus high grades for Judging stu- 
dents may result from a more compatible match 
than for Perceiving students, not from ability 
alone. Similarly, we know that standardized tests 
are usually designed by academically minded psy- 
chologists, a large proportion of whom are Intu- 
itive types. 

* Finally, type theory affirms the potential of all 
types to perform well in any setting given the 
motivation and the opportunity to do so. ' 

10. What resources are most important for using the 

MBTI in educational settings? 

The materials listed below have been found useful by 

educators in type concepts and the MBTI. The first 


list includes aids to interpretation of MBTI profiles. 

Whenever possible, one of the various lorms of Intro- 

duction to Type should be made available to each 

respondent. These brief booklets were designed to 
help individuals make sense out of their MBTI profiles. 

Those found most appropriate in education arc: 

* DiTiberio, J. K., &amp; Hammer, A. L. (1993). Introdue- 
tion to Type in College. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

* Hammer, A. L. (1993). Introduction to Type and 
Careers. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists 
Press. 

e Hirsh, S. K., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1998). Introduc- 
tion to Type in Organizations (3rd ed.). Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

* Myersjil. B; with Kirby, L. Ki &amp; Myers, K. D. 
(1998). Introduction to Type (6th ed.). Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

The following materials are practical aids for intro- 

ducing type concepts in a varicty of ways in school 

and college settings: 

e Meisgeier, C., Murphy, E., &amp; Meisgcier, C. (1989). 
A Teachers Guide to Type. Palo Alto, CA: Consult- 
ing Psychologists Press. 

* Provost, J. (1992). Strategies for Success: Using Type 
to Do Better in High School and College. Gainesville, 
FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

e Van Sant, S., &amp; Payne, D. (1995). Psychological Type 
in Schools: Applications for Educators. Gainesville, 
FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

The following materials also include practical issues 

of application but in general provide a thorough dis- 

cussion of the issues related to type in education: 

¢ Fairhurst, A. M., &amp; Fairhurst, L. L. (1995). Effec- 
tive Teaching, Effective Learning: Making the Person- 
ality Connection in Your Classroom. Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 

* Lawrence, G. (1993). People Types and Tiger Stripes. 
Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psycho- 
logical Type. 

* Murphy, E. (1992). The Developing Child: Using 
Jungian Type to Understand Children. Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 


Conclusion 


MBTI research in education has continued to confirm the 
MBTIS Jungian theoretical constructs. lt has also pointed 
out interactions between individuals of various types with 
the expectations of their academic environments. 

Type theory provides a useful model for conceptualizing 
the multiple processes that students and teachers employ as 


Uses of Type in Education 283 


they go about the tasks of learning and instruction. The 
research reviewed in this chapter has suggested how MBTI 
patterns inform discussion of issues as diverse as instruc- 
tional approaches to rcading, writing, and foreign language, 
cngagement in campus extracurricular activities, interpre- 
tation of academic standardized aptitude and achievement 
results, patterns across both gifted and at-risk students, and 
the relationship of preferred processes of perception and 


judgment as defined by Jung to electrical brain activity and 


to learning and cognitive styles of students as well as 
tcacher behaviors. 

Too casual a reading of the tvpe literature in education 
over the decades can give the impression that the MBTI 
sorts people into camps of the intellectually capable and 
those who are not. Indeed, the present review of rescarch 
has continued to report the affinity of Intuitive types for 
activities usually associated with academic success: stan- 
dardized aptitude scores; grades in college, especially in the 
first year; proficiency measures in reading, writing, foreign 
language learning, and sometimes mathematics; high per- 
centages among gifted students at all levels; nominations as 
teacher of the year among college faculty—the list goes on. 

lt is not enough for educators to point to other chapters 
of this manual to identily areas of success for Sensing types, 
such as business careers, some health professions, and the 
like. What need to be examincd intensively are the arenas 
within academic life where Sensing types thrive and where 
Intuitive types tend to slack off (even though they often still 
survive due to flashes of insight through verbal expressive- 
ness). Robinson (1994) found competitive and active 
aspects ol the relatively elite Academic Decathlon competi- 
tion to appeal to SP types, who in most studies are among 
those most at risk. Provost (1985) interviewed ISTPs 
among students who had persisted to successful comple- 
tion ol college and lound that not being involved in campus 
social life helped them do well, opposite the finding for 
other types. These and studies like them need to be repli- 
cated so that educators can take seriously the admonition of 
Myers (Myers with Myers, 1980/1995) that in education, as 
in all settings, one must deal with variations of giftedness, 
not simply one kind. 

Several research tools can be employed to bring the 
above elfort to fruition. Since type theory is dynamic, fur- 
ther research taking the 16 types into account is clearly 
called for. The design of Harrison and Lawrence (1985) 
provides a prototype: Hypotheses were driven by Jungian 
theory, and responses were solicited from each of the 16 
types to the question of study (in this case projections into 
one’s personal future). Other studies have involved inten- 
sive qualitative interviews to explore how individuals ol a 
given type respond to educational settings, as done, lor 
cxample, by Provost, Carson, and Beidler (1987) with out- 
standing college professors, by Ferdman and DiTibcrio 
(1996) with fifth-grade writers, and by Ehrman (1990) with 
foreign language professionals. 


&gt; 


d 


84 


The Uses of Type 











Some important cautions have been discovered from this 


review of the MBTI literature. Simplistic applications ol 


MBTI profiles by way of matching teachers with students, 
for example, produce at best mixed results. Human person- 
ality differences appear to be sufficiently complex that vari- 
ables beyond type must be considered. As the recent study 
by Schurr et al. (1997) points out, MBTI preferences arc 
best conceptualized as contributing to academic success by 
interaction with other variables. Thus a strict linear cause- 
cffect approach to MBTI rescarch would appear to producc 
limited results. 

Where possible, MBTI distributions for a sample should 
be compared with distributions of related groups through 
selection ratio type table analysis (McCaulley, 1985). The 
base population for comparison must be carefully selected. 
But the results can provide perspective on how subjects in 
the group of concern (ADD children, for example) may be 
operating in the context of influential others (the types 
among, for example, their teachers, parents, or classmates). 
In this regard, type research, especially in education, needs 
to investigate pcrson-context interactions. When we notice 
either success or blocks in learning, these results can be 
viewed not as a direct result of type preferences themselves 
but as a subtle interaction between the types of our subjects 
of study and the expectations of those individuals or groups 
who influence them. 





Because of this powertul interplay between nature (what 
the personality of each student brings to learning) and nur- 
ture (the influence of the learning environment), the discus- 
sion of type differences in education ultimately pertains to 
the issue of human growth and development. Whether their 
efforts are intentional or not, teachers, counselors, and 
school administrators are involved with the facilitation of 
not only the academic but also the personal development of 
students. The words of Myers that began this chapter noted 
that intelligence, often considered the hallmark of educa- 
tional expertise, is best accompanied by acceptance and 
development of type preferences. The chapter similarly con- 
cludes with another quotation from Myers (with Myers, 
1980/1995, p. 183), which calls attention to the conditions 
parents must consider to nurture the development of differ- 
ent types of children. Educators in most settings can benefit 
from her insights: 


Unknowingly parents frequently refuse their children the condi- 
lions necessary for good type development: the young introverts 
who get no peace or privacy, the extraverts shut off from people 
and activity, the intuitives tied to routine matters of fact, the sens- 
ing children required to learn everything through words with 
nothing to see or handle, the young thinkers who are never given 
a reason or permitted an argument, the feeling types in a family 
where nobody cares for harmony, the judging types for whom all 
decisions are handed down bv an excessively decisive parent, and 
the young perceptives who are never allowed to run and find out. 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling — | ) 


Assumptions Underlying the Use of 
the MBTI in Career Counseling 


Work Environments 
Occupational Selection 
Job Satisfaction 
Interests 

Values 

Career Decision Making 


Other Factors Influencing 
Career Counseling 


Four Levels of Type Interpretation 
in Career Counseling 


Administering and 
Interpreting the MBTI in 
Career Counseling Settings 


Conclusion 


Revised by Jean M. Kummerow 


he use of the Mycrs-Briggs Type Indicator personality 

inventory in carcer counseling to help people find 
meaningful and productive work was one of Isabel B. 
Myers’ original motivations in the development of the 
instrument (Saunders, 1991). Career counseling applica- 
tions were one of the first areas of applied research on type, 
and the field continues to generate a large number of 
research studies. 


The MBTI assessment tool has been widely used in a vari- 
ety of career counseling settings including private practice, 
high schools, community colleges and technical schools, 
colleges and universities, and organizations. Its use in these 
settings has been multiple and includes identifying possible 
job titles to explore, meaningful work environments, com- 
pauble interests, and congruous values. Type also con- 
tributes to understanding the job search process itself 
including career exploration, managing change, decision- 
making strategies, and implementing choices. 

The goal of this chapter is to illustrate aspects of using 
the MBTI with career counseling clients. Its “how-to” focus 
includes ways to apply research results from both previously 
reviewed research literature in the 1985 MBTI Manual and 
MBTI Applications (1996) and recent rescarch studies. Addi- 
tional research based on Form M of the MBTI from several 
samples, including a national one of over 3,000 adult men 
and women, is incorporated. (For more on the national sam- 
ple sce Chapter 7.) This chapter also highlights relevant 
career development theory and provides suggestions to 
practitioners along with case studies that illustrate the usc- 
fulness of the MBTI with carcer counseling clients. 


285 


86 The Uses of Type 


Assumptions Underlying the Use 
of the MBTI in Career Counseling 


Many clients arrive in career counscling with the expecta- 
tion that the process will be to “give me a couple of tests that 
will tell me what | should be.” They fail to realize there are 
many factors in occupational choice and satisfaction besides 
what a few psychological instruments reveal. These factors 
include physical and mental health, interests, values, person- 
ality characteristics, family circumstances, geographic loca- 
tion, job market conditions and trends, education, skills, 
abilities, cultural/ethnic/gender identification, and so forth. 
Satisfaction within an occupation includes factors such as 
the job itself, the organizauon, pay, supervision, co-workers, 
and advancemenvlearning opportunities. To expect the 
MBTI instrument or any other instrument to provide all of 
the answers to a career search is improbable and unrealistic. 
It can be only part of the puzzle in finding onc’s lifes work. 


The Changing Nature of 
Career Counseling Theories 


Implicit also in the clients plea for *the answer" is the 
expectation that carecr counseling is a matter of matching a 
person with a job. It is based on the theorctical framework 
called “trait-and-factor” espoused by Parsons in the early 
1900s, which has been the foundation of career counseling 
for decades (Krumboltz, 1996). If using psychological type 
within this framework, we would work to match people’s 
types to careers most conducive to that type. However, 
there are problems inherent in this approach regarding the 
use of type: People with different types can do the same jobs 
(perhaps using different approaches), and if everyone were 
the same type in a job, it is less likely that fresh approaches 
and innovations would come into that occupation. Further- 
morc, work environments may differ widely, and thus dif- 
ferent types, while doing the same jobs, may be in vastly 
different workplaces. 

Another theoretical framework for career counscling has 
been called the “person x environment fit theory,” which 
cspouscs that individuals can take active roles in altering or 
creating work environments to better fit with their personal 
preferences (Chartrand, 1991). Thus self-knowledge of 
type can help one identify what is likely to be satisfying and 
suggest strategies for changing a work environment to be 
more conducive to the use of one's own type. It is within 
this framework that much of this chapter is positioned. 

There are a number of other theories in the career coun- 
scling field that are included in relevant sections below. 
Each theory focuses on different aspects of the career coun- 
seling process, such as incorporating values, self-efficacy, 
and interests into the process, and all have much to con- 
tribute as a result. Folding psychological type in with these 
theories helps expand their applicability as well. 


The Changing Nature of VVork 


In addition to the changing views of the theoretical nature 
of career counseling, the nature of work and career is 
changing, and hence the essence of career counseling must 
change also. Arthur and Rousseau (1996) define and rede- 
fine the term career as follows: *Old Meaning: a course of 
prolessional advancement; usage restricted to occupations 
with formal hierarchical progression, such as managers and 
professionals. New Meaning: the unfolding sequence of any 
persons work experiences over timc" (pp. 29-30). The old 
meaning focuses more on what you do, i.c., the job titles 
vou hold, while the new meaning focuses more on who you 
are and the skills you bring with you from work experience 
to work experience. Bridges (1994) discusses the impor- 
tance of identifying and understanding your temperament 
as one key to prospering in the new world of work. Person- 
alities do carry "implications for the particular roles or situ- 
ations where the person is likely to work well and be 
happy" (p. 88). He reminds us too that cven within particu- 
lar fields, different personalities can thrive. 

Type is particularly helpful within this new framework 
of work since its focus is a broad one on the individual. 
Type also assumes a developmental component so that indi- 
viduals can adapt to new situations using all parts of their 
personalities. Counselors can use type to help identify the 
morc satisfying situations and roles, as well as to help indi- 
viduals adapt to those that seem to bc a stretch for them. 


The Changing Role of the Career Counselor 


Given that the world of work and the view of whats 
“needed” in career counseling are changing, it only makes 
sense that the role of the carcer counsclor is changing as 
well. As Krumboltz (1996) explains, 


Matching an individual to an occupation requires that the occu- 
pation have a common and stable set of duties and expectations. 
At one time, this requirement was quite reasonable. . .. The 
modern age is changing the old order. Workers are increasingly 
being expected to accomplish whatever work needs to be 
accomplished, not merely to fulfill a written job description. . . . 
Career counselors will have an opportunity to play a major role 
in helping individuals learn how to cope with the need for new 
skills and the associated stresses. . . . If career counselors see 
their job as merely matching individuals to existing occupations, 
they will rapidly become obsolete hecause stable occupations as 
we have known them are on the way out. (pp. 57—58) 


Work Environments 


In examining the relationship between psychological type 
and work, the focus on the larger picture of the work envi- 
ronment, including tasks engaged in or avoided and the 
specific structure of the work environment, seems appro- 
priate. Type preferences are likely to affect activities as well 
as environments that people find cnergizing and satisfying. 


Table 12.1 


Effects of Extraversion- 


Introversion in Work Situations 


Extraverts 


Introverts 





Like variety and action 


Tend to be faster, dislike 
complicated procedures 
(especially ES types) 

Are often good at greeting 
people (especially EF types) 
Are often impatient with 
long, slow jobs done alone 


Are interested in the activities 
of their job, in getting it done, 
and in how other people do it 
Often do not mind the 


interruption of answering the 
telephone (especially EF types) 


Often act quickly, sometimes 
without thinking it through 


Like to have people around 
(especially EF types) 
Usually communicate freely 
(especially EF types) 


Like quiet for concentration 


Tend to be careful with details, 
dislike sweeping statements 
(especially IS types) 

Have trouble remembering names 
and faces (especially IT types) 


Tend not to mind working on 
one project for a long time alone 
and uninterrupted 


Are interested in the details 
and/or ideas behind their job 


Dislike telephone intrusions and 
interruptions (especially IT types) 


Like to think a lot before they 
act, sometimes without acting 


Work contentedly alone 
(especially IT types) 


Have some problems communi- 
cating to others since it’s all in 





Uses of Type in Career Counseling 


287 


Table 12.2 Effects of Sensing-Intuition 
in Work Situations 


Sensing Types 


Like focusing on the here and 
now and reality 


Rely on standard ways to solve 
problems and dislike problems in 
which this approach doesn't work 


Like an established order of 
doing things (especially SJ types) 
Enjoy using and perfecting skills 
already learned more than 
learning new ones 


Work more steadily, with 
realistic idea of how long it 
will take (especially IS) types) 


Reach a conclusion step 

by step (especially ISJ types) 
Are patient with routine details 
(especially IS] types) 

Are impatient when the 
situation gets complicated 
(especially ES types) 


Intuitive Types 


Like focusing on the future and 
what might be 


Like solving new problems in 
unusual ways and dislike solving 
routine problems 


Dislike doing the same thing 
repeatedly (especially NP types) 


Enjoy learning a new skill more 
than using it 


Work in bursts of energy, 
powered by enthusiasm, with 
slack periods in between 
(especially ENP types) 

Reach an understanding quickly 
(especially ENP types) 

Are impatient with routine details 
(especially ENP types) 


Are patient with complex 
situations (especially IN types) 


their heads (especially IT types) 


Tables 12.1—12.4 identify various likes and dislikes in work 
situations that Myers and McCaulley (1985) believed were 
associated with cach preference. These are reported for the 
preferences only, with some combinations of the prefer- 
ences noted in the tables. Obviously other combinations of 
the preferences, including whole type combinations, would 
also affect the desired work situation. 

Research also documents the importance of different 
work environments to different types. The work setting pref- 
erences of phvsicians were reported by Quenk and Albert 
(1975). Among the findings, Extraverted physicians favored 
active involvement with the outside world including their 
patients and their communities. Feeling types emphasized 
involvement with the people in their lives and practices. 
Thinking types seemed to concentrate more on the nonpeo- 
ple aspects of their work such as their continued advance- 
ment. Judging types desired to maintain the boundaries in 
their practices between personal and professional lives. 

Research from data using Form M and the Work Environ- 
ment Scale is reported in Chapter 9, “Validity.” These data 
provide information on what is important in an ideal work 
environment (see Table 12.5). The sample consisted of 98 
cmployees in a variety of occupations at a large Midwestern 
university who attended a session to learn more about 
themselves. *Co-worker cohesion" (friendly, supportive co- 
workers) is important in the ideal to Extraverted and Feel- 
ing types; this outside focus toward others fits with the 


Are not often inspired and 
rarely trust the inspiration 
when they are 


Follow their inspirations, good 
or bad, regardless of the data 
(especially with inadequate type 
development) 


Seldom make factual errors Frequently make errors of fact, 


preferring instead the big picture 


Dislike taking time for precision 
(especially EN types) 


Tend to be good at precise work 
(especially IS types) 

Create something new by 
adapting something that exists 


Create something new through 
a personal insight 


theoretical view of Extraversion and Feeling. “Co-worker 
cohesion” is less important to ST types than to the other 
function pairings. Perhaps they focus more on the “things” 
in their work than on the people. “Supervisor support” is 
more important to the Extraverted types, again with their 
focus on the outside world, which seems also to include 
their supervisors to a degree. This support is less important 
in the ideal work environment for the STs than for the other 
three function pairings; again, STs may focus less on 
the people side of how the job is accomplished. “Auton- 
omy” is more important in the ideal to the IPs than to the 
EJs; later studies in this chapter on values will also show 
this pattern. “Task orientation” in this sample is more 
important to the Extraverted than to the Introverted types; 
this likely fits with their foeus on showing the outside 
world that something has been done. However, “Task orien- 
tation” is less important in the ideal to the STs than to other 
function pairings, a result difficult to explain. By definition 


288 The Uses of Type 


Table 12.3 Effects of Thinking-Feeling 
in Work Situations 


Thinking Types 


Like analysis and putting things 
into logical order 


Can get along without harmony 


Tend to be firm minded 


Do not show emotion readily 
and are often uncomfortable 
dealing with people's feelings 
(especially IT types) 

May hurt people's feelings 
without knowing it 

Tend to decide impersonally, 
sometimes paying insufficient 
attention to people's wishes 


Need to be treated fairly in 
accordance with the 
prevailing standards 


Are able to reprimand people 
impersonally, although they may 
not like doing so 


Are more analytically oriented— 
respond more easily to people's 
thoughts (especially IT types) 


Feeling Types 


Like harmony 


Efficiency may be badly disrupted 
by office feud 


Tend to be sympathetic 


Tend to be very aware of other 
people and their feelings 
(especially EF types) 


Enjoy pleasing people, even in 
unimportant things 


Often let decisions be influenced 
by their own or other people's 
personal likes and dislikes 


Need praise and personal 
attention 


Dislike, even avoid, telling people 
unpleasant things 


Are more people oriented— 
respond more easily to people's 
values 


Table 12.4 Effects of Judging-Perceiving 
in Work Situations 


Judging Types 


Work best when they can plan 
their work and follow the plan 


Like to get things settled and 
finished 


May decide things too quickly 
(especially E] types) 
May dislike to interrupt the 


project they are on for a more 
urgent one (especially IS} types) 


May not notice new things that 
need to be done in their desire 
to complete what they are doing 


Want only the essentials needed 
to begin their work (especially 
ESJ types) 

Tend to be satisfied once they 


reach a judgment on a thing, 
situation, or person 


Perceiving Types 


Adapt well to changing situations 


Prefer leaving things open 
for alterations 


May unduly postpone decisions 
(especially IP types) 

May start too many projects and 
have difficulty finishing them 
(especially ENP types) 

May postpone unpleasant jobs 
while finding other things more 
interesting in the moment 


Want to know all about a new 
job (especially INP types) 


Tend to be curious and welcome 
a new light on a thing, situation, 
or person 





STs usually focus on the task to be accomplished and value 
efficient policies and procedures, something at odds with 
these results. In this study, SFs desire more clarity in terms of 
daily work expectations than STs and NTs; this fits with the 
SF focus on detail and knowing the parameters of their work 
expectations, along with their desire to fit in with those with 
whom they work, perhaps hy "pleasing" them through doing 
the work in a way others have delineated. “Managerial con- 
trol,” or using rules to keep people under control, is in the 
expected directions. Sensing types, more than Intuitive 
types, would likely want the rules spelled out ahead of time. 
Judging types, with thcir desire for structure, would likely 
desire this more than Perceiving types. "Innovation" is 
important to Intuitive types, and especially to NFs; change 
and possibilities are often expressed in Intuition. Pleasant 
physical surroundings are more important in the ideal to EPs 
than to IJs; EPs extravert their dominant Perceiving func- 
tions and might be more tuned to the external environment 
than IJs, who introvert their dominant Perceiving functions. 
Most of these findings fit with what we would expect from 
type theory and add to our understanding of what makes an 
ideal work environment for different types. 

Depending on what is important to individuals, satislac- 
tion with the work environment may take on different 
casts. For example, DiMarco (1997) found physical therapy 
students described the same clinical settings differently 
depending on their temperament (SJ, SP. NE NT). Even for 


those working in the same setting, some described it as 
"satisfying and challenging" while others saw the same site 
as "disappointing and boring." 


Work Environments for the National Sample 


The national sample was asked how they felt about different 
work environments with the question, “How would you 
feel about working in an organization that... ?" Twelve dif- 
ferent variables were presented, on which they could indi- 
cate “Like,” “Indifferent,” or “Dislike” to as many as they 
wanted. Table 12.6 ranks these variables and identifies the 
types with the highest and lowest “Like” percentage 
responses on each one. 

The most important variable in an organizational work 
environment in this sample was “having clear structures 
and responsibilities"; nearly 88.6% of the total sample liked 
that work environment characteristic. ESTJs liked this the 
most at 96.096 and INTPs, the least, although still 73.796 
liked this. The majority of the sample and of every type 
within that sample also liked having a "variety of tasks," 
"independence and achievement,” “employee loyalty and 
job security" and "working as part of a team." Of least 
importance was “everything done by the book,” with only 
14.996 represented. “Opportunities for advancement and 
high pay but not job security” was chosen by 28.7% of the 
sample, and “toe the line” expectations by 35.6% overall. 

Table 12.7 presents the five most important work environ- 
ment characteristics (in descending order) for each type in 
the national sample. For all Sensing types with the excep- 
tions of ESTP and ESFP “clear structure" was the most 
important work environment characteristic. This “clear 


Table 12.5 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 289 








Ideal Work Environment Characteristics Based on 


Work Environment Scale Subscales Study 


Ideal Work Environment Characteristic 


Co-worker Cohesion (friendly, supportive co-workers) 
Supervisor Support (supportive management) 


Autonomy (self-sufficient employees) 


Task Orientation (emphasis on good planning, efficiency, getting job done) 
Clarity (employees know what to expect in daily tasks and company policies) 


Managerial Control (use of rules to keep employees under control) 


Innovation (variety, change emphasized) 


Physical Comfort (pleasant physical surroundings) 


Preference Functions Pairing Attitudes Pairing 
ET ST &lt; SENENT 
E ST « SENENT 
IP &gt; EJ 
E ST &lt; SENE NT 
SF &gt; ST,NT 
oy ST &gt; NENT EJ al? 
SF &gt; NE Ej &gt; EP 
ij &gt; IP 
N NF &gt; ST, SF 
NF &gt; ST 
EP &gt; IJ 





Note: Correlations with preferences are ».20. All results are statistically significant at the .05 level or better. Pairs results are based on MANOVAS and 


post-hoc analyses. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source’ Employee Career Enrichment Program, Umversity of Minnesota 


Table 12.6 


Work Environment Characteristic 


Clear structures and responsibilities 88.676 
Variety of tasks 86.876 
Independence and achievements 86.176 
Employee loyalty and job security 79.776 
Work as part of team 78.676 
People with different backgrounds 61.475 
Makes jobs simple 47.176 
Does not expect extra hours 45.376 
International opportunities 36.676 
Toe the line expectations 35.676 
Opportunities for advancement 28.7% 
and high pay but not job security 

Everything done by the book 14.6% 


Average Like % 


“Liking” of Work Environment Characteristics in the National Sample 


Highest Like % &amp; Type Lowest Like % &amp; Type 


73.7% INTP 
77.6% ISFP 

80.3% ISTP 
53.5% INTP 
61.5% INTP 
46.1% IST] 

17.2% INT) 
20.8% ENT] 
22.6% ISFJ 

18.8% ENT] 
20.8% INFJ 


96.0% EST) 
95.8% ENT} 
93.2% ENTP 
88.0% ISFJ 

87.6% EST) 

79.2% ENT} 
62.3% ESFP 
57.9% ESFP 
68.8% ENT) 
43.0% ESF 

44.7% ENTP 


24.4% IST] 4.5% ENFP 





Note: See Appendix for a description ol the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


structure” likely provides a grounding in reality for the Sens- 
ing types. For the ESTP and ESFP, “clear structure” was either 
second or third. “Variety of tasks” was the most important 
work environment characteristic for all Intuitive types with 
the exception of the INFPs, who put it in second place. “Vari- 
ety of tasks" may lead to the possibilities often sought by Intu- 
itive types. "Loyalty and security" was among the top five for 
all types except the NTs, who likely see that work characteris- 
tic as less objective and logical than they prefer. They chose 
instead working with “people with different backgrounds,” a 
characteristic on their top five but on that of no other types. 
Perhaps “people with different backgrounds" help bring the 
desired variety and challenge to the work of the NTs. 


Overall in this sample it appears that people like to know 
what it is they are to do and the boundaries for their work 
but decide their own ways of handling those responsibilities. 
They also like having some varicty and teamwork in an 
organization that is loyal to them and provides job security. 
People seem to value some work environment characteris- 
tics in similar ways, regardless of type. However, the differ- 
ences that do emerge seem to fit with type theory. 

Table 12.8 lists the four types who liked each of the 12 
work environment characteristics the most. Remember 
from Table 12.7 that all types like clear structures and 
responsibilities, variety of tasks, etc. Table 12.8 identifies 
for cach scparate work environment characteristic the types 


290 


Table 12.7 The Five Most Important Work Environment Characteristics 


The Uses of Tvpe 


for Each Type in the National Sample 


IST] 


Clear structure 


Independence 
and achievement 


Loyalty/security 
Variety of tasks 


Teamwork 


ISTP 


Clear structure 
Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Loyalty/security 


Teamwork 


ESTP 


Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Clear structure 
Teamwork 


Loyalty/security 


EST) 


Clear structure 
Teamwork 
Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Loyalty/security 


ISFJ 


Clear structure 
Loyalty/security 


Independence 
and achievement 


Variety of tasks 


Teamwork 


ISFP 


Clear structure 
Loyalty/security 


Independence 
and achievement 


Variety of tasks 


Teamwork 


ESFP 


Variety of tasks 
Clear structure 


Independence 
and achievement 


Loyalty/security 
Teamwork 


ESF] 


Clear structure 
Loyalty/security 
Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Teamwork 


INF] 
Variety of tasks 


Clear structure 


Independence 
and achievement 


Loyalty/security 
Teamwork 


INFP 
Independence 
and achievement 
Variety of tasks 
Clear structure 
Teamwork 
Loyalty/security 


ENFP 
Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Teamwork 
Clear structure 
Loyalty/security 


ENF] 


Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Teamwork 
Clear structure 
Loyalty/security 


INTJ 


Variety of tasks 
Clear structure 


independence 
and achievement 


Teamwork 


People from different 
backgrounds 


INTP 


Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Clear structure 
Teamwork 


People from different 
backgrounds 


ENTP 


Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Clear structure 
Teamwork 


People from different 
backgrounds 


ENTJ 


Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Clear structure 
Teamwork 


People from different 
backgrounds 





Note: Those in boldface were liked by more than 80% of that type. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Sour «National sample 


liking that characteristic the most. Thus, although "clear 
structure” was important to every type and among their top 
five work environment characteristics, it was most important 
to ISF], ISTJ, ESTJ, and ESF] types. While “toe the line” was 
not important to any of the types in great numbers, it was 
relatively more important for ISTJ, EST], ESFJ, and ESFE 
types. To help place this information in context, those work 
environment characteristics in bold on Table 12.8 were cho- 
sen bv over 5096 of the types. For example, the 5 types (out 
of 16) most liking "international opportunities" were INTP 
ENTP ENFP ENFJ, and ENT]. Over 5096 of the INTPs, 


ENTPs, and ENT]Js liked this work environment characteris- 
tic, while less than 50% of ENFPs and ENFJs chose this as 
an important work environment characteristic. 

The patterns noted on Tables 12.6-12.8 fit with type the- 
ory. For example, in theory, “loyalty” is important to SFs, 
and this is confirmed by the research results. That NTs enjoy 
challenges seems apparent in their greater desire for "variety 
of tasks" in their work, "international opportunities," and 
"advancement without security." In theory, NPs are often 
independent minded. The research results suggest a num- 
ber of work environment characteristics that allow that to 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 291 


Table 12.8 The Four Types in the National Sample Who Most Liked 
Each Work Environment Characteristic 



















IST} 


Clear structure 


ISF) 
Clear structure 
Loyalty/security 


Does not expect 
extra hours 


INT) 
Variety of tasks 










Toe the line 
Goes by the book 





Makes job simple 






Goes by the book 

































ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
Loyalty/security Independence International opportunities 
Makes job simple and achievement Advancement/pay, not security 
Does not expect People from different 
extra hours backgrounds 

ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
























Makes job simple Independence 


and achievement 


Variety of tasks 


Independence 
and achievement 


Does not expect 
extra hours 








Teamwork 


Toe the line People from different 


backgrounds 


International opportunities 


Advancement/pay, not security 
International opportunities 






EST) ESF) ENF) ENT} 















































Clear structure Clear structure Variety of tasks Variety of tasks 

Teamwork Loyalty/security Independence People from different 
Loyalty/security TEAIn work and achievement backgrounds 

Teche Makes job simple Teamwork International opportunities 
Goes by the book Does not expect extra hours People from different Advancement/pay, not security 


back d 
Toe the line | ac d s B 
ternat tunit 
Goes by the book nternational opportunities 
Advancement/pay, not security 









Note: The 16 types were ranked from high to low on the percentage responding “like” to each of the 12 work environment characteristics. The four types 
with the highest percentages are included in the table. Those characteristics in boldface were liked by more than 50% of that type. Thus even though no 
type was attracted to a high degree to “Goes by the book," ISTJ, ESTJ, ESFJ, and ISFJ were attracted more than the other types. See Appendix for a descrip- 
uon of the sample. 


Source. National sample. 


292 The Uses of Type 


continue, such as liking “independence and achievement,” 
"people from different backgrounds,” “international activi- 
ties,” and "advancement and pay without security.” SJs, 
with their focus on “clear structures” and “going by the 
book,” want an orderly work environment rather than forg- 
ing out on their own, whereas their opposites, the NPs, 
scem to prefer more variety and change. In theory, Ex- 
traverted workers might pay particular attention to their 
external work environment. Indeed, they seem to have 
liked more work environment characteristics than did their 
Introverted colleagues as shown in Table 12.8. The Ex- 
traverts also liked “teamwork” relatively more than the 
Introverts, something we might expect from the theory. 


Implications for Practitioners 


Type theory and researeh suggest that type preferences ean 
affect the preferred work environment but also that there 
are factors that are less type related and that most types 
have in common. For some clients, especially Sensing ones 
who like to build on experienees, reviewing their past jobs 
for understanding what has felt comfortable or uneomfort- 
able in previous work environments may be a helpful 
beginning point. For other clients, especially Intuitive 
types, a focus on future possibilities in work environments 
may be a more interesting start. As clients learn about type, 
they can use Tables 12.1—12.4 as a focus for the possible 
environments and work tasks to fit either scenario. Most 
clients will note that they participate in activities on both 
sides of the dichotomies. This process helps to illustrate the 
complexity of type within an individual and also how peo- 
ple often do use both sides. 

Tables 12.7-12.8 also emphasize important work envi- 
ronment characteristics for each type based on research 
results and can serve as resources. Counselors may wish to 
focus discussions on what seems to be important in the work 
environment to each type. Other well-known sources of 
information to clients that cover work setting information 
include Introduction to Type (Myers, with Kirby and Myers, 
1998), Introduction to Type and Carcers (Hammer, 1993), and 
Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; Kummerow, 
1998). The latter publication and LIFETypes (Hirsh &amp; Kum- 
imcrow, 1989) also suggest a “preferred work environment” 
lor each of the 16 types. Clients may find useful the descrip- 
üons in Do What You Arc (Tieger &amp; Barron-Tieger, 1992) on 
how work fits different types and the suggestions for adapt- 
ing work tasks to type in WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, 
&amp; Kirby, 1997). Work, Play, and Type (Provost, 1990) offers 
suggestions lor finding play at work for different types, activ- 
ities that may help bring work environments more in line 
with type preferences. 

Counselors can stay alert to the work environment fae- 
tors that seem to be causing strain in the client’s work life. A 
client may be in an environment that does not fit with his or 
her natural preferences, yet for a variety of reasons prefers 
not to change environments/jobs. Perhaps the client has 








invested a great deal in getting educated/trained in the field, 
or perhaps he or she is unable to risk a potential loss of 
income by striking out into a different environment. Ham- 
mer (1993) suggests clients might either alter the job to fit 
their personalities or adapt themsclves to fit the job. Clients 
may end up doing a bit of both. One of his suggestions is 
that clients locate or ereate within the same occupation a 
particular environment that is more like them or find col- 
leagues with whom they share more similarities. Here are 
some examples ol people who used this strategy: 


B An INFE] chemist in a research and development depart- 
ment began working as a liaison between human resources 
and the scientists to help them better understand one 
another. He found much in common with those in human 
resources and was able to increase his job satisfaction. 

B An ENFJ computer programmer helped found a support 
group for programmers at the bank in which he worked. 
Eventually he moved into training people to work with 
computer information systems. He found like-minded 
colleagues, which helped increase his job satisfaction, and 
then a set of job responsibilities more compatible for his 
personality. 

B An INTJ high school English teacher always took a quick 
walk by himself at lunchtime and deliberately did not car- 
pool so that he would have quiet, solitary time on the 
drive home. This slight change of work environment 
increased his energy and thus his job satisfaction. 

B An ESF) project coordinator found that working among 
highly technical people was draining her energy and lead- 
ing to much job dissatisfaction. She wanted more social 
interaction during her day and more overt signs of appre- 
ciation. She kept the same position but transferred her 
desk into the sales and marketing department. Her col- 
leagues there socialize with her regularly, ask about her 
family, and often compliment her work. She has decided 
to stay in the job as a result. 

m One ESTP created her own testing and assessment niche 
in a firm of industrial psychologists. As a consultant on a 
part-time contract, she also had the flexibility to decide 
her own schedule, which she found immensely satisfying. 
She was particularly strong at working with executives 
who were in a crisis situation in terms of their perfor- 
mance. Her practical, expedient suggestions were just 
what was needed. 

W An ISFP administrative assistant physically changed her 
work (and her nonwork) environment to better suit her. 
She was in a space without windows, but she managed to 
hind wallpaper with a huge outdoor scene to make her feel 
in touch with the outside world. She continually re- 
arranges her office to make things more convenient; SPs 
olten seek an "economy of effort." Her manager gives her 
complete freedom to set her own priorities, deadlines, and 
work methods, so when she gets bored with one task, she 
can immediately jump to another. In her personal life she 
is a hospice volunteer. When her own mother needed 


such care, she found hospice workers were like “guardian 
angels who flew in when we didnt have a clue.” She 
wants to be able to do the same for others now. 


Type provides valuable insights into work environment 
issues. Counselors and clients can use that information to 
understand the work environment fit and/or misfit, design 
ways of working within the environment or changing it, or 
envision a different environment with the goal ultimately to 
increase job satisfaction. 


Occupational Selection 


One ol the most common and difficult-to-answer questions 
career counselors face from clients is, “What job should I be 
in?" The question is difficult in part because it is so nar- 
rowly focused. Career counscling emphasizes widening the 
focus beyond a single job to job clusters and transferahle 
skills, and building skills to find new "jobs" in the future. 
The U.S. Department of Labor is moving from a task-based 
approach with its Dictionary of Occupational Titles to an 
Occupational Information Network system to identify skill 
sets and worker attributes and to encourage people to 
develop multiple skills (Minnesota Department of Eco- 
nomic Security, 1997). Thus in career counseling the single 
focus on locating one specific job is too limiting, yet it is 
also important beeause it is the perceived need of many of 
our clients. The process of career counseling includes 
broadening the focus and teaching clients how to use career 
development tools in the future. 

Even with the concerns discussed above, type remains 
useful in foeusing on both specific jobs and job clusters and 
potential skill sets. According to type theory, MBTI types 
would be distributed in occupations consistent with the 
characteristics of the work environments of those occupa- 
tions. Occupations may both require and reward specific 
ways of perceiving information and making decisions on 
that information; thus different types would be expected to 
be attracted to different occupations. 


Occupational Trends by Type 


The focus of this section is on the occupational trends for 
the eight preferences and the 16 types. Myers and MeCaul- 
ley (1985, p. 78) note these activities preferred by the eight 
preferences: 


B Extraverted types: Work that allows interaction with a 
succession of people or that has activities outside the 
office or away from the desk 

B Introvertcd types: Work that permits some solitude and 
time for concentration 

B Sensing types: Work that requires attention to details and 
careful observation (such as in applied occupations) 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 205 





m Intuitive types: Work that provides a succession of new 
problems to be solved (such as in theorctical occupations) 

m Thinking types: Work that requires logical order, espe- 
cially with ideas, numbers, or physical objects (such as 
in occupations with technical/scientific components) 

m Fceling types: Work that provides service to people and a 
harmonious and appreciative work environment (such 
as in occupations emphasizing communications and 
interpersonal aspects) 

B Judging types: Work that imposes a need for system and 
order 

B Perceiving types: Work that requires adapting to changing 
situations or where understanding situations is more 
important than managing them 


Occupational trends by type are presented in Table 12.9. 
The patterns appear more pronounced by the function pairs, 
or columns of the type table, rather than other combina- 
tions; the next section gives further evidence in this regard. 


The Importance of the 
Functions in Job Choice 


Data seem to support the trend that the function pairs, ST, 
SE NE and NT, i.e., the columns of the type table, have the 
most impact on job selection. Hammer and Maedaid 
(1992a) examined lists of occupational titles for each type 
and determined the amount of overlap on the occupational 
lists within pairs of opposite types (see Table 12.10). The 
overlap ranged from 2% to 14% with the median overlap of 
496. That is, for each pair of opposites only one to seven job 
tides out of more than 200 occupations appeared among 
the top 50 occupations for both types. When Hammer and 
Macdaid compared pairs of types with the same functions 
(e.g., ST, SE NE NT) but different attitudes (J, IP, ER EJ). 
they found a median overlap of 41%; for those with oppo- 
site functions (ST versus NF; SF versus NT) but the same 
attitudes the mean overlap was only 4% (sec Table 12.11). 
Thus those sharing the same two functions have far more in 
common in terms of occupational selection than those with 
opposite function pairs. For example, SEs are more likely to 
be found in jobs similar to one another and more likely to 
be in different jobs than NTs. 

In general, the function pairs seem to influence career 
choices in the following manuer: 


B SIs arc often found in environments where they can 
focus on pragmatic ways to use details, such as in busi- 
ness. For example, an ST with a graduate degree in 
counseling became an expert in psychological testing 
and its applications. 

m SFs like to help people in practical ways, such as in 
health care and education. An SF with a graduate degree 
in counseling focused his skills on coaching managers 
to develop effective working relationships with their 
staffs. 


294  TheUses of Type 


Table 12.9 Occupational Trends of the 16 Types 








INT) 






IST] 





ISF] 





































Management Education Religion Scientific or technical fields 
Administration Health care Counseling Computers 

Law enforcement Religious settings Teaching Law 

Accounting Arts 















or any other occupations 
where they can facilitate emo- 
tional, intellectual, or spiritual 
development 


or any other occupations 
where they can draw on their 
experience base to personally 
help people in a behind-the- 
scenes manner 


or any other occupations where 
they can use their intellectual 
creativity and technical knowl- 
edge to conceptualize, analyze, 
and get the task done 


or any other occupations where 
they can use their experiences 
and attention to detail to get 
the task done 









ISTP INTP 






Skilled trades Health care Scientific or technical fields 
















Counseling 





Technical fields Business Writing 








Agriculture Law enforcement Arts 
Law enforcement 


Military 


















or any other occupations or any other occupations where | or any other occupations where | or any other occupations where 
where they can use their they can use their gentle, service- | they can use their creativity and | they can use their solitary, objec- 
hands-on, analytical work related attentiveness to detail. focus on their values tive analysis of problems based 


with data or things on their technical expertise 










ESTP 











































Marketing Health care Counseling Science 
Skilled trades Teaching Teaching Management 
Business Coaching Religion Technology 
Law enforcement Childcare worker Arts Arts 


Skilled trades 


or any other occupations where 
they can use their outgoing 
nature and enthusiasm to help 
people with their practical needs 








Applied technology 













or any other occupations 
where they have the opportu- 
nity to take on new challenges 
continually 


or any other occupations where 
they can use creativity and com- 
munication to help foster the 

growth of others 


or any other occupations 
where they can use their 
action-oriented focus to attend 
to the necessary details 











EST] ESF] ENT) 




































Management Education Religion Management 
Administration Health care Arts Leadership 
Law enforcement Religion Teaching 








or any other occupations 
where they can use logic and 
organization of the facts to get 
the task done 


or any other occupations 
where they can use tough- 
minded analysis, strategic 
planning, and organization 
to get the task done 


or any other occupations 

where they can use their per- 
sonal concern to provide ser- 
vice to others 


or any other occupations where 
they can help others with their 
emotional, intellectual, and spiri- 
tual growth 







Source: From Introduction to Type and Careers (pp. 16-31), by A.L Hammer, 1993, Palo Alto, CA. Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1993 hy Consulting Psychologists 
Press Used with permission. 


B Nis want to help people through working in areas such B NTs focus on theoretical frameworks, such as in science, 
as religion, counseling, and the arts. An NF with a grad- technology, and management, to keep themselves and 
uate degree in counseling became a therapist helping others challenged. An NT with a graduate degree in coun- 
people grow, develop, and learn to understand them- seling used her strategic focus and management skills to 


selves and others better. become an executive in the human resources area. 


Table 12.10 Percent Overlap Between 
the Top 50 Occupations 
for Opposite Types 


Types % Overlap 





ENT) and ISFP 
EST] and INFP 
ENF] and ISTP 
ESF] and INTP 
ENFP and IST] 
ENTP and ISFJ 
ESFP and INT) 
ESTP and INF} 
Median 


AA oo FAB NMN 


Source: From Career Report Manual (p. 37), by A L Hammer and G P Macdaid, 
1992. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. Copynght 1992 by Consulting 
Psychologisis Press. Used with permission. 


Keep in mind that all 16 types can and do work in a 
variety of occupations. 


Sources and Examples of Occupational Data 


The MBTI research litcrature has a number of sources of 


occupational data: 


m Mvers-Briggs Type Indicator Atlas of Type Tables (Mac- 
daid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz, 1986) 

m Manual: A Guide to the Development and Use of the MBTI, 

Appendix D (Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985) 

Career Report Manual (Hammer &amp; Macdaid, 1992a) 

Journal of Psychological Type articles 

Various unpublished dissertations 

Association for Psychological Type Conference Proceedings 


The most comprehensive lists of occupational data sorted 
by type are published in Appendix D of the 1985 MBTt Man- 
ual and in the Career Report Manual (1992). Each type has a 
listing of more than 200 occupations chosen most to least fre- 
quently by people of that type. The Atlas of Type Tables 
(1986) contains data on hundreds of occupations; cach occu- 


pation has a separate type table showing the distribution of 


types within that occupation. These data were gathered 
between 1971 and 1984. Since these occupational data are 
available elsewhere, they are not reprinted in this manual. 

When reviewing any occupational database, the reader is 
urged to consider these issucs: 


BW How representative is the career sample of current occu- 
pational trends in the field? When was the sample drawn? 
Samples from the first three sources above are considered 
samples of convenience and are relatively old, having 
been gathered in the 1970s through the mid-1980s. 
While probably representative of the occupation if the 
numbers are large and if occupational requirements havc 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 295 








Table 12.11 Percent Overlap for Types 

with Opposite Functions/Same 
Attitudes Versus Types with Same 
Functions/Opposite Attitudes 

Types % Overlap 

ISTJ and INF} 4 

IST) and ESTP 36 

ESF| and ENT| 2 

ESF] and ISFP 32 

ENF] and EST) 4 

ENFJ and INFP 44 

INT] and ISF| 4 

INTJ and ENTP 52 


Source. From Career Report Manual (p. 37), by A. L Hammer and G P Macdaid, 
1992, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press Copyright 1992 hy Consulting 
Psychologists Press. Used with permission. 


not changed substantially since then, they may reflect 
also a bias toward people who are interested in psycho- 
logical type since they have all taken the MBTI. Macdaid 
(personal communication) reported another possible 
biasing factor: When occupations wcre just opening up 
to women (as was occurring during that time period), 
the female “pioneers” tended to have EN preferences. 
Type theory would suggest that ENs would be more 
likely to move to these new areas with their "let's change 
it” view of life. 

B What is the gender makeup of the samples? Most of the 
occupational samples combine genders. Preliminary 
research (Macdaid, personal communication) indicates 
that men and women report similar type distributions in 
the same occupation if that occupation has been “open” 
to both men and women. The slight exceptions secm to be 
on the Thinking—Feeling dichotomy, where more women 
report Feeling and more men Thinking, although the 
occupational distributions still lean toward the majority 
gender in the field. For example, in engincering, the 
majority of men and women prefer Thinking; however, 
there are more men than women who prefer Thinking in 
engineering. 

B What are the cducational levels represented in the occu- 
pations? This particularly affects the available lists of 
occupations lor Sensing types, especially the Sensing 
Perceiving combinations. Those Sensing types with uni- 
versity degrees may notice many occupations shown as 
most attractive to their type that do not require their 
level of education; this is likely to be disheartening to 
some, and the practitioner is urged to put these data into 
a context. Atsome point in the future it would be helptul 
to have occupational lists for cach type further divided 
by educational levels, such as the occupations most fre- 
quently chosen by each type with university degrees, 


296 The Uses of Type 


W How satisfted are those types with their careers? On the 
MBTI answer sheet is a question about job satisfaction. 
In a study by McCaulley, Macdaid, and Granade (1993), 
ol the 6626 who answered the question about how much 
they liked their career, only 2% indicated they “did not.” 
Thus the majority of those in the occupational samples 
used in the 1985 MBTI Manual and in the MBTI Career 
Report liked their jobs “O.K.” or “a lot," and we assume 
they are generally satished. A later section in this chapter 
examines the occupational satisfaetion issue in more 
detail. 

B How successful are those types in their career? We 
have little data to that effect. See Chapter 13 for more 
background. 


To give the reader a sample of what one encounters in 
studies on careers and type, a synopsis of data on occupa- 
tional samples from some recent journal articles, confer- 
ence proceedings, and dissertations is reported in Table 
12.12. As can be observed, the type preferenees and modal 
types are what one would likely expect in these various 
occupational samples. 

Hammer (1996a) summarizes the evidence in the *occu- 
pational selection" area: 

Evidence to support the proposition that occupational choice is 

related to the preferences measured by the MBTI is abundant 

and compelling. The preponderance of data and the contingency 
table analyses conducted on them show that the distribution of 
types across occupations generally follows theoretical predic- 
tions. Unequal distribution of types consistent with predictions 
has also been found across groups within an occupation, across 
tasks within an organization, and across occupations in a differ- 
ent culture using a translation of the MBTI. (p. 37) 


Understanding the Numbers in Career Data 


In examining the trends in the career data, it is necessary to 
understand the two kinds of numbers we encounter in the 
held and the ways those numbers are used: 


1. Absolute frequencies. These are often presented as per- 
centages and are most useful when reviewing overall 
labor force trends and attempting to understand the 
basic characteristics of an occupation. 

2. Self-selection ratios (SSR). Self-seleetion ratios or con- 
tingency table analyses take into account the relative 
Irequencies of the type in the population as well as in 
the sample gathered. They are important because type 
distributions show that each of the 16 types does not 
contain exactly 6.25% (or a I6th) of the population 
or of the sample. Thus a ratio, comparing the pereent- 
age of each type within a sample group to the percent- 
age existing in the base population, is important 
because this analysis does take the actual population 
differences into account. These ratios are meaningful 
when working with individuals to determine whether 
the field is relatively more or less attractive to a given 


type. Ratios above 1.00 mean that more people of that 
type are attracted to the occupation than we would 
expect given their frequency in the base population. 
Numbers less than 1.00 mean fewer of that type are 
attracted to the occupation given their frequency in 
the population. And of course, numbers around 1.00 
mean nearly equal frequencies in both the base popu- 
lation and the sample group. 


For example, the national sample (a base population) 
contains more ESTJs (8.7%) than INFPs (4.496). Yet if we 
were looking at an occupational sample in which ESTJs and 
INFPs have similar percentages, such as librarians 
(Scherdin, 1994), where 7.396 are INFP and 6.1% are EST], 
we mask these differences. It looks like ESTJs and INFPs 
find library work equally attractive, at least from these 
numbers. However, if we compare their frequencies in the 
sample to the base population frequencies, the INFPs have 
an SSR = 1.66 and the ESTJs, SSR = .70. Thus the oeeupa- 
tion of librarian is more attractive to the INFPs than to the 
ESTJs. (See Chapter 9, “Validity,” lor an in-depth discussion 
of these ratios.) 


Sample Question Illustrating SSRs 


To further illustrate these concepts, we will explore possible 
carecr and educational paths in a business environment. 
First we start with the national representative sample (the 
overall sample as well as males and females) as our base 
population, which is shown in Table 12.13. (Remember the 
national representative sample was drawn from the national 
sample to match U.S. census data; see Chapter 7 for more 
information.) 


l. Which types are attracted to business school? 
Common sense as well as research suggests "that 
managers of all types learn to value ‘managerial cul- 
ture, which ean be characterized in type terms as 
STJ— practical and results-oriented” (Walek, 1996, p. 
70). One group valuing this managerial culture is 
likely to be those pursuing a masters of business 
administration (MBA). A sample of MBA students, 
most of whom have work experience (Power &amp; 
Lundsten, 1997), shows the modal types to be EST] 
and IST], a match with the prediction. Table 12.14 
presents the type distribution of this sample of over 
1,900 students and compares it with that of the base 
population, the national representative sample. We 
can see that this sample of MBA students does draw 
more STJ types as evidenced both by the frequencies 
and the ratio above 1. The NTJs, although not as great 
in numbers and frequencies as the STJs in the sample, 
have even higher SSRs than the STJs. (Both sets of 
data are statistically significant.) Thus even more NTs 
are attracted to the graduate program than STs, given 


Table 12.12 Occupational Sample Studies 


Occupation 


Certified public 
accountants 


Dentists and dental 
specialists 


Fast-growth entre- 
preneurs; small firm 
entrepreneurs; small 
business owners; 
lower-level managers; 
managers; executives 


High school basket- 
ball officials 


Hospital nurse man- 
agers and staff nurses 


Life insurance agents 


Line and staff 
managers 


Senior student affairs 
officials on campuses 


Source 


Satava, 1996, |997 


Grandy, Westerman, 
Ocando, &amp; Erskine, 
1996 


ut dmi 


Reynierse, 1997 


Scott &amp; Scott, 1996 


Van Ham, 1994 


Lewis, Tobacyk, Daw- 
son, Jurkus, &amp; Means, 
1996 


Reynierse &amp; Harker, 
2% 


Daugherty, Randall, 
&amp; Globetti, 1997 


Sample Description Modal Type 
N = 439 IST] EST) 
65% male 

N = 381 general S TEST] 
practice 

N = 9| specialists 

Mostly male 

N = 135 to 1,024 

N = 110 males; wide EST] 

range of occupations 

and educational Jevels 

N = 52 nurse 

managers 

N = 52 staff nurses 

N = 223 ESTJ 

N = 237 line managers 

N = 190 staff managers 

N= IS3 INT], ENT) 


297 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 


Other Findings 


National firms had more Extraverts; local 
firms, more Introverts 


Extraverts supervised more staff than did 
Introverts 


No differences in types between general 
practice and specialists 


72% E = Small firm entrepreneurs 
54% | = Fast-growth entrepreneurs 
66% S = Lower-level managers 
60% N = Small firm entrepreneurs 
8776 T = Executives 

56% F = Small business owners 
77% | = Lower-level managers 


5276 FP = Small firm entrepreneurs 


IT%= SJ 
0% = NP 


Nurse managers had more T types than 
staff nurses 


Staff nurses had more S and F types than a 
composite sample of women with college 
degrees 


74% - E 
EAS 
6396 zT 
"A 


Line versus staff managers: 
E = 79% versus 53% 

S = 59% versus 43% 

T = 90% versus 87% 

J = 86% versus 67% 


E = 60% 
N = 69% 
T= 57% 
|B aw 


less than 7% were SP types 


Total Population! 
Male? 
Female? 


Total Population! 
Male? 


Female? 


Total Population! 
Male? 


Female? 


Total Population! 
Male? 


Female? 









1483 (49.3%) 
1,526 — (50.720) 
2206 (73.3%) 

803 (26.7%) 
1210 — (40220) 
1,799 — (59.85) 
1629 — (54.196) 
|,380 — (45.990) 


Pairs and Temperaments 


\ 870 (28.9%) 
IP 656 (21.8) 
EP 724 (24.1%) 
EJ 759 (25.2%) 
ST 900 (29.9%) 
SF 1306  (43.4X) 
NF 493 (16.4%) 
NT 310 (10.33) 
5J 1,395 (46.4%) 
SP 8l! (709) 
NP 569 (18.99) 
NJ 234  (7.8X) 
TJ 725  (24.1*)) 
TP 485 (16.1%) 
FP 895 (29.73) 
FJ 904 (30.0%) 
IN 336 (11.2%) 
EN 467 (15.5%) 
IS — 4190 (39.52) 
ES 1,016 (33.8%) 
ET 540 (17.9%) 
EF 943 (31.3%) 
IF 856 (28.4%) 
IT 670 (22.3%) 


a I E a SS a COM SEC NM NR 
Note: IN = 3,009; ?N = 1,478; N = 1,531; See Appendix for a description of the samples. For distribution of types and preferences by gender, 
reler 10) Tables 11S ana 7715: 


Source National representative sample 


I 


their numbers in the base population. Often graduate 
programs teach theoretical frameworks, something 
likely attractive to the NT group in theory and seem- 
ingly in practice, at least in this sample. 


. Which types are drawn toward small business 


ownership? 

A dream for some people is to own their own small 
business. One way to look at the attraction of a partic- 
ular type to small business ownership Is to compare a 
sample of small business owners to the national rep- 
resentative sample. In this case we'll use separate data 
lor men (Table 12.15) and women (Table 12.16). The 
male and female distributions and SSRs are similar. 
IST] and EST] are the modal types for both samples, 
and both have SSRs above 1.00 (with statistical signif- 
icance at the .001 level), indicating that more of those 
types are attracted to small business ownership than 


we might expect given the base population. However, 
in both samples, while the INTJs and ENTJs are 
smaller in numbers, their SSRs are usually higher 
than those for the STJs, especially in the female sam- 
ple. Thus even more NTJs are attracted to small busi- 
ness ownership than we might expect given their 
numbers in the base population. (Note, however, that 
the male INTJ sample did not reveal statistically sig- 
nificant results and thus needs to be viewed with cau- 
tion.) 


. (ma Feeling type with an MBA, but I don't want to 


work in a large organization. Might I find other 
“kindred” spirits in small businesses? 

To put this question in context, consider that there 
are fewer management jobs now available in organi- 
zations due to flattening of the structure, and thus the 
MBAs may consider small business ownership as an 


Table 12.14 Working MBA Students 
Compared to the National 
Representative Sample 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 








299 





Table 12.15 Male Small Business Owners 
Sample Compared to Male 
National Representative Sample 


IST) ISFJ INFJ INTJ 
N = 330 N= 63 N=34 N = 136 
17.1% J3% 1.8% 7.1% 
SSR21.489* SSR=.24"* SSR=1.21  SSR-343** 
ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
N - 8l N=24 N = 36 N=117 
42% |.396 1.9% 6.1% 
SSR=.78 SSR=.14***  SSR=.43*"*  SSR-I.87** 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
N= 119 N - 39 N=114 N= 195 
6.2% 2.0% 5.9% 10.1% 
SSR = 1.44% SSR=.24** = SSR-73*  SSR-23.7** 
EST) ESF} ENF) ENT) 
N 7 335 N 2 91 N= 40 N= 171 
17.4% 4.7% 2.1% 8.9% 
SSR 22.01***  SSR-.399* ^ SSR-.84 SSR = 4.86% 


Note: Working MBA students N = 1,925, national representative sample 
N = 3,009; *p «.05, **p « OI, ***p &lt; .001. See Appendix for a description 
ol the sample 


Source’ From "Studies That Compare Type Theory and Left-Bram/Right Brain The- 
ory.” bv S J. Power and L L Lundsten, 1997, Journal of Psychological Type, 43, p 25 
Copyright 1997 by Journal of Psychological Type Used with permission 


option. We are therefore shifting the base population 
from the national representative sample to the MBA 
students in order to understand a possible career 
path for these studenis, especially the Feeling type 
asking the question. Table 12.17 shows this compari- 
son and uses the primarily male small business 
owner sample. Please note that the small business 
owner sample used did not typically have MBA 
degrees; MBAs usually go to work in large organiza- 
tions (Hammer, 1997). All SF types were relatively 
more attracted to small business ownership when 
they were compared with the national representative 
sample (SSR &gt; 1.00), even though their numbers are 
small in terms of their workforce trends. However, 
their results are not stausucally significant, and there- 
fore generalizing from them is not recommended. 
Furthermore, the NF types all have SSRs well below 
1.00 with results significant at the .05 or better level, 


IST) ISFJ INF) INT} 
N=112 N=19 N=2 N= 23 
25.28% 4.29% AS% 5.19% 

SSR = 154  SSR-.539  SSR=.35 SSRzIS7 

ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
N=30 N=6 N-1I N=13 

6.77% 1.35% 23% 2.93% 

SSR =.79 . SSR-.I8"* SSR=.05** SSR =.6l 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
N=30 N-13 N-1II N - 20 
6.77% 2.93% 2.48% 4.51% 

SSR=1.21 SSR=.43*F . SSR-.399* SSR-I.I3** 
EST) ESF} ENF} ENT) 

N = 107 N=24 N=3 N= 29 
24.15% 5.42% 68% 6.55% 
SSR = 2.16"  SSR-.729*  SSR=.42 SSRz2429* __ 





Note: Male small business owners N = 443, male national representative 
sample N = 1,478; *p &lt;.05, **p « .01, ***p&lt; 001. See Appendix fora 
description of the sample. 


Source From Guide to the Strong and MBTI Entrepreneur Report (p. 20), by A I 
Hammer, 1997, Palo Alto. CA: Consulting Psychologists Press Copyright 1997 
by Consulung Psychologists Press. Used with permission 


inclicating they are less likely to self-select into small 
business ownership as a career. For the NTs the index 
is also below 1.00, indicating the small business 
career path is less attractive to these MBA students. 

In general, these data do not suggest a clearcut 
career path into small business ownership for the 
Feeling types, but of course they do not eliminate 
such a path since that would be an inappropriate way 
to use psychological type. This Feeling types carcer 
counselor may need to focus on helping this client 
identify important values and where the client might 
be able to live out those values, both inside and out- 
side the work environment. For some that work envi- 
ronment may be within a small business and for oth- 
ers in a large organization. 


The use of the appropriate base population is an issue 
when using ratios, and which base is “right” depends on the 


300 


The Uses of Type 





Table 12.16 Female Small Business 
Owners Sample Compared to 
Female National Sample 


d 


3 
NA 
1 AS 


YS Ej ISF) INFJ INT) 
N37 N=9 We N=4 — 
P. 20.73% 10.98% t.22% 4.88% .' 
SSR = 2.99 SSR = .57 SSR = 75 SSR = 5.74 
ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
N=5 — N- N=0 N39 
6.1096 N 2.44% 0.00% 2.44% 
SSR = 2.59 SSR = .25* SSR 7 0.00* SSR = 1.38 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
N=2 Ni N=4 N=5 
244% 2.44% 4.88% 6.10% 
SSR = .81 SSR = .24* SSR = .50 SSR = 2.52 
EST) ESF] ENF] ENT) 
N=14 N=8 N= | N-6 
17.0795 9.7696 112294 7:3296 
SSR 32.72" SSR=.58 SSR 37 SSR = 8.0*** 


6 SS ae Se ODE MEET ART 


Note: Female small business owners N = 82, female national representative 
sample N = 1,531; *p &lt;.05, **p &lt; .01, **£p.Z 001. See Appendix for a 
description of the sample. 


Source From Guide to the Strong and MBTI Entrepreneur Report (p. 18), by A. L. 
Hammer, 1997, Palo Alto, CA: Consulung Psvchologists Press. Copynght 1997 
by Consulting Psychologists Press. Used with permission. 


question asked. The different base populations used in our 
examples above gave some contrasting pieces of informa- 
tion. Some types, such as ENTJs, are more drawn toward 
business school and small business ownership when com- 
pared to the general population (the national representative 
sample); however, comparing the ENTJs to MBA students 
as the base, they are less drawn toward small business own- 
ership. The opposite case occurs also with some Feeling 
types; SEs are somewhat attracted toward small business 
ownership if the base is MBA students (although not to the 
point of statistical significance); when the base is the 
national representative sample, they do not appear attracted 
toward small business ownership. 

To put these examples in additional context, the MBA and 
small business owner samples were bascd on Form G data, 
while the national representative sample is from Form M. 
I his may have created some differences. In addition, they are 
independent samples. In some research, dependent samples 
would be morc appropriate, such as a sample of the types 


) 


Table 12.17 Male Small Business 
Owners Sample Compared 
to MBA Students 


IST) ISF) INF] INT) 
N=112 N=19 N=2 N 223 
25.28%  429X 45% 5.19% 

SSR = 1.47" ) SSR= 1.31 SSR = .26* SSR = 73 
— MÀ À—ÀÀÀ e — 

ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
N = 30 N36 N-1 N313 

6.77% 1.35% 23% 2.93% 

SSR = 1.61* SSR = 1.09 SSR = .12* SSR = .48** 
AER Se l———9 ll 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
N = 30 N= 13 N=11 t= N = 20 

6.77% 2.93% 2.48% \ 451% 

SSR = 1.10 SSR = 1.45 SSR =.42** SSR = 457 

ESTJ ESFJ ENF] ENT) 

N = 107 N 224 N=3 N = 29 
24.15% 5.42% 68% 6.55% 
SSR = 1.39% SSR = 1.15 SSR = .33* SSR = .74 


Note: Male small business owners N = 443, MBA students N = 1,925; 

*p «.05, **p &lt; OL, ***p&lt;.001. See Appendix for a description of the 
sample. 

Source From Guide to the Strong and MBTI Entrepreneur Report (p. 20), by A L. Ham- 
mer, 1997, Palo Alto, CA Consulting Psychologists Press. Copyright 1997 by Con- 
sulting Psychologists Press. Used with permission. 


leaving a particular company compared to the base popula- 
tion of the overall type distribution within that company. 
Nonetheless, these samples are used to illustrate some points 
about the use of numbers in career data. SSRs are likely to be 
helpful with individual cases pondering directions toward 
which to move. The percentages of types are helpful in 
understanding some basic characteristics of the occupation 
or in this case also a particular educational program. 


Type Diversity Within an Occupation 


At times, while looking at the type trends in an occupation, 
one can forget the diversity of specialties within an occupa- 
tion as well as the many different ways people can go about 
completing tasks even in more narrowly defined jobs. There 
are niches and specialties within many occupations. The 
diversity is likely necessary within an occupation to keep 
the occupation from growing stale and to prevent “group 
think.” When someone has a type different from that of the 


majority, that individual may even take the role of a “pio- 
neer” by bringing in fresh, new approaches and insights. 

Myers (1980/1995) offered data on the specialties of 
physicians and found that types were likely to specialize in 
medical fields predicted by type theory. In follow-up work 
by McCaulley (1977) it was noted that when physicians 
changed specialties, they more likely went into specialties 
aligned with their personality preferences. This is presented 
also as evidence that it is the personality that shapes the 
occupational path, not the occupational path that shapes the 
personality. For example, pediatricians did not become 
ESF]s after entering that specialty, but rather it was their 
ESFJ preferences that drew them to pediatrics. In other 
words, according to these data and to type theory, those in 
the same occupation do not develop a particular personality 
as a result of their work. The occupation does not eause the 
personality; rather, personality characteristics may draw 
people toward certain occupations. Thus, people in the 
same occupation are likely to share some similar personal- 
ity characteristics. 

The familiar occupation of librarian provides another 
example of type diversity within an occupation. Stereotypes 
of librarians suggest they are by preference Introverted, 
Sensing or Intuitive, Thinking, and Judging. 


B Introverted: Concentrate quietly on ideas and information 
B Sensing: Look at facts 

B intuitive: Focus on ideas in new ways 

B Thinking: Analyze information objectively 

B Judging: Follow an organized system to find materials 


And, indeed, the individual preferences of I, N, T, and J 
are in the majority (Seherdin, 1994). Moving to a whole 
type analysis, the modal type of librarians is ISTJ. Table 
12.18 provides a type table of 1,600 librarians who com- 
pleted the MBTI in 1992. While the percentages between 
men and women were generally similar on E-I, S-N, and 
J-P, there were greater differences on T-E with men 69% T 
and women 58% T. This illustrates Macdaid’s (personal 
communication) point that even when the majority preter- 
ence is toward Thinking, women will be less so in their per- 
centages than men because more women are Feeling types 
in general. 

So what happens when people of different personality 
types do library work? How might they go about their 
work? Table 12.19 shows a summary by type of some spe- 
cialties within the library profession and aspects of the job 
particularly enjoved by the representative type. This infor- 
mation is anecdotal and provided by librarians interviewed 
for this chapter. 

Each of these 16 individuals works in the same oecupa- 
tion, and each has taken time to be “on the desk" and 
answer reference questions. They nonetheless have all 
found areas in which to specialize, aud they view some 
parts of their jobs as more satisfying than others. 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling — 301 





Table 12.18 Type Table of Librarians 


ISTJ ISF) INF] INT) 
N = 265 N = 129 N = 104 N = 184 
16.5% 8.1% 6.5% 11.5% 
BEBEBBBSEBE WEBRBBERBBE BBEBBE BBBEWEBEBE 
BEEBEE m 
ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
N = 36 N=27 N=116 N= 146 
2.3% 1.7% 7.3% 9.1% 
BH B BEBBEBS BEBERBNE 
ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 
N-18 Pres N - 96 N - 94 
|. 196 0.8% 6.0% 5.9% 
DL] a BEBEBE BEBERRB 
EST) ESF} ENFJ ENT) 
N = 98 N = 66 N - 8l eso, 
6.1% 4.1% 5.1% 7.9% 
BESBEBEBS BBEB BEBEB BEBBBEBE 


Note: N = 1,600. 


Source From Discovering Libranans. Profiles of a Profession, by M J. Scherdin, 1994. 
Association of College and Research Libraries, American Library Association Used 
with permission. 


Implications for Practitioners 


There are clearcut trends in occupational choices by type 
but also individual differenees within occupations. Practi- 
tioners can point out both patterns as clients assess jobs for 
themselves. The function pairs (ST, SE, NT, NF) play the 
greatest role in occupational choice; therefore, helping 
clients see how they can access their functions in a job is 
important. 

Career counselors are also urged to encourage their 
clients to examine potential careers for the possibility of 
subspecialties or at least ways of changing the mix of activi- 
tics performed: How ean the job and the personality mesh 
more closely? An example of how clients with different 
types might find or create special niches within a specific 
occupation where the likelihood of using their type preter- 
ences is higher is seen in Table 12.19 with librarians. 

From the data available, practitioners can see patterns 
and trends in occupational selection by type. However, they 
should also keep in mind the bigger picture and avoid 
encouraging clients to go into a career simply because thev 
are the "right" type or discouraging clients from going into 
a career simply because they are the “wrong” type. 


302 


The Uses of Type 


Table 12.19 Sample Specialties Within the Library Profession and Aspects of the Job Enjoyed 


IST) Cataloguer 
(public library) 


| 
| Deciding exact subject heading 
and classification of new works 


| Orderliness of the position 


. Working uninterruptedly in a 
quiet space 





(public school system) 


Keeping up with the latest 
equipment and computer 
applications 





Using technology in his work 


Teaching short courses on 
computer applications 





ESTP Technology Specialist 
(extension division 
of university) 


Trying out and then adapting 
technologies to the library's 





needs (as a "techno guinea pig") 


Preparing and updating VVeb 
pages 


Teaching others how to use the 


technologies she has learned 


Being away from her desk 


EST] Library Services 
Coordinator (state 
institution libraries) 


Planning how to provide 
services, thinking through 
various approaches and the 
consequences of decisions 
Taking responsibility and 
efficiently following through 
Keeping her technical skills and 
knowledge up-to-date so she 
can check the facts quickly 


ISTP Automation Specialist 


ISFJ Assistant Public Services 
Manager (public library) 


Planning and organizing events 
with the unofficial title of 
"project queen" 


Coordinating staffing needs and 
organizing training programs to 
meet those needs 

Putting out a calendar of events 


"Bringing both heart and detailed 
organization" to her work 


ISFP Archivist 
(state library) 


Surrounding herself with rare 
books and special documents 


Finding just what the patrons 
need to make them happy 


Camaraderie with other staff 


ESFP Law Librarian 
(law firm) 


His colleagues and the friendships 
and teamwork they've developed 


Variety of requests he gets; "no 
two days are alike" and even the 
"law changes weekly" 


Satisfaction of helping those 
lawyers find the information they 
need, although “at times no 
answer exists and it's hard to 
figure out when to stop!" 


ESF)J Distance Learning 
Librarian (university library) 


Traveling on-site to teach others 
basic library skills including 
searching special indexes, evaluat- 
ing information they find, and 
showing them how to order 
materials on their own 


Helping students find needed 
resources, using a personal touch 


Providing whatever support 
faculty and students need 


INF) Reference Librarian 
(small public library) 


Coming up with creative ways to 
meet customers’ needs: "| can 
think of SO ways to approach 
their need. l'il make what | have 
here relate to their topic and 
show them how it does.” 


Seeing the patrons happy 


Quiet activities such as paper- 
work tracking library statistics 


INFP Small Branch Library 
Manager (public library) 


Forming personal relationships 
with customers and enjoying 
their idiosyncrasies 


Being part of the community 
and touching people's lives 


Building collaborations: "| see my 
library as not having any walls, 
both literally and figuratively” 


ENFP Children’s Librarian 
(public library) 


Having a variety of duties and 
loving them all 


Having freedom to move from 
area to area and learning 
something from each 


Being creative, such as develop- 
ing storytime kits for daycare 
providers 


ENF) Large Branch Library 
Manager (public library) 


Playing a variety of roles such as 
“hostess, mother, social worker, 
promoter...” 


Encouraging the process of 
intellectual development in her 
patrons 


Contributing to her staff's own 
personal and professional devel- 
opment including letting them 
make mistakes 


INTJ Collections and 
Acquisitions Head 
(university library) 


Developing and working with 
policies and procedures and 
identifying the need for new ones 


Reviewing curriculum changes 
and their impact on the library 


Monitoring the budget and 
moving monies around to meet 
needs through paying attention 
to the big picture 


INTP Acquisitions Specialist 
(university library) 


Analyzing what is needed in the 
library collection 

Building high-quality collection 
through critiquing materials 


Constantly searching for new 
knowledge 


Having a quiet space in which to 
concentrate deeply 


ENTP Inter-Library Loan 
Department Head 
(public library) 


Fielding whatever comes to her 
and seeing what people are 
wondering about 


Determining what piece of 
the"library puzzle" fits a 
patron's needs 


Having a variety of activities 


Staying on the cutting edge to 
better help customers 


ENT) Library Director 
(college library) 


The information and systems 
aspects of his job: "Library work 
can be conceptualized as a flow, 
which can be done poorly or well, 
efficiently or inefficiently. It's a 
series of events to be organized.” 


Making decisions, especially 
about his own work 


Staying on task; hes most 
bothered by personnel issues 





UT IO OLIECUM TL TA O OT T” O L O OU T ee a i a aS rr Pe LO NELÉSZÉZÉZEOM ÉL Aa C NCC CNN 
Note: This table and accompanying text show possible library specialties and are based solely on interviews with librarians who happen to have these spe- 
cialues. Special thanks to Karen Kolb, St. Paul (Minnesota) Public Library; M J. Scherdin, Edgewood College, Madison, Wisconsin; and Donna Brevfogle, 
University of Manitoba Library, Winnipeg, Canada, for help locaung librarians of diverse types. And thanks ro all the librarians who responded with infor- 
mation and anecdotes about their work. 


Job Satisfaction 


Career counseling clients want (a) an occupation that is sat- 
isfying or at least more satisfying than the current one and 
(b) an occupation in which they can perform satisfactorily. 
The Theory of Work Adjustment (Dawis, 1996) focuses on 
"the process by which the individual seeks to achieve and 
maintain correspondence with thc environment" (p. 79). 
When the occupational tasks are congruent between the 
individual and the environment, more satisfaction is likely to 
result than when the fit is less positive. The individual and 
the environment correspond. We would predict that when 
there is congruency between the individuals psychological 
type and the task demands of the occupation, more satisfac- 
tion is likely to result. Myers and McCaulley (1985) state, 


When there is a mismatch between type and occupation, the 
client usually reports feeling tired and inadequate. According to 
type theory, the mismatch causes fatigue because it is more tir- 
ing to use less-preferred processes. A mismatch also causes dis- 
couragement, because despite the greater expenditure of effort, 
the work product is less likely to show the quality of products 
that would be developed if the preferred process were utilized. 
Tasks that call on preferred and developed processes require less 
effort for better performance, and give more satisfaction. (p. 78) 


Hammer (1996a) provides a summary of the studies of 
job satisfaction reported in the Career Report Manual (Ham- 
mer &amp; Macdaid, 1992a) as well as a synopsis of more than a 
dozen studies on the subject. Among the occupations stud- 
ied for satisfaction data were bank officers/financial man- 
agers, computer professionals, dietitians, elementary and 
secondary school teachers, intensive care nurses, health care 
managers and executives, lawyers, managers, occupational 
therapists, parish pastors, pediatric nurse practitioners, 
pharmacists, secondary marketing education teachers, secre- 
taries, teachers, and vocational education administrators. 
Hammer also points out some of the difficulties in looking at 
satisfaction, such as a restriction in range of data on satisfac- 
tion and on unusual classifications of some of the occupa- 
tional data. He summarizes his literature review as follows: 


When satisfaction is measured globally, its relationship with 
psychological type is equivocal. However, among those studies 
that do show a relationship, a pattern seems to emerge. Overall, 
Introverts and Percciving types seem less satisfied with their 
work than do Extraverts and Judging types, although the one 
study that examined men and women separately suggested that 
overall results may be misleading if gender is not accounted for. 
When specific facets or aspects of job satisfaction are employed 
instead of global measures, the picture becomes clearer. For 
example, the T-F scale seems to be important in identifying sat- 
islaction with co-workers. Type theory would predict that dil- 
ferent types will have different criteria for satisfaction, and this 
seems to be at least partially supported by the research 


Studies of person-environment fit . . . suggest that those 
who are dissatisfied in an occupation tend to be those types 
who are opposite from the modal type in the occupation. A 
number of studies have also suggested that those types who are 


Uses ol Type in Carcer Counseling 303 





less frequent or underrepresented in an occupation tend to be 
less satished or have higher intention to leave the occupation 
than do those types who are more frequent or whose fit with 
the occupation is judged to be better. (pp. 40-41) 


A few additional studies support Hammers 1996 sum- 
mary. Murry and Markham (1997) noted that in their sam- 
ple of employees of a media organization, the INFPs indi- 
cated high dissatisfaction and likelihood to leave. Their 
colleagues with opposite types, ESTJs, indicated high satis- 
faction and little likelihood to leave. Hammer noted this IP 
dissatisfaction and EJ satisfaction pattern also. 

Hopkins (1997) surveyed 133 members of a professional 
association on type and concluded that people who felt 
their job matched their personalities were more satisfied 
with their jobs than those who did not. SFs were the group 
least satisfied with their job matches. In personal telephone 
calls with some subjects, Hopkins (personal communica- 
tion) noted also that SFs, out of the four function pairs, 
seemed the most grateful that someone was listening to 
them and their concerns. In his study, the variables of co- 
workers, the work itself, and supervision were far more 
important to job satisfaction than werc pay and promo- 
tions. His sample was highly educated, high in job tenure, 
middle-aged, and Caucasian. 

Tischler (1996) examined the success of a group of gov- 
ernment employees based on their personality fit with their 
organization. Performing satisfactorily, i.e. success, is often a 
variable related to satisfaction. He commented that while 
people may have been drawn to careers and organizations by 
their personality fits and may remain there and draw comfort 
and satisfaction partly because of those fits, their success as 
measured by salary increase and promotions was not signifi- 
cantly related to type. Age, gender, and education were the 
variables in his sample that did affect success. Thus person- 
ality type was not a key factor of success in his sample. 


Job Satisfiers and Dissatisfiers 
in the National Sample 


Although there may be many reasons for persons to seek 
career counseling, one is likely to be dissatisfaction with the 
current job. 1n the national sample, data on work satisfac- 
tion and dissatisfaction were gathered. Respondents were 
asked to indicate their responses on a four-point scale of 
“Very Satisfied,” “Somewhat Satisfied,” “Somewhat Dissat- 
isfied,” or “Very Dissatisfied” on 3 questions related to their 
overall work (the work, company, and future work oppor- 
tunities) and 14 questions on aspects of their work. They 
were also asked to indicate how likely they were to leave 
their current job within the next year on a scale of “Very 
Likely" “Somewhat Likely" or “Very Unlikely.” Income 
data were gathered as well. Table 12.20 presents this infor- 
mation for the highest and lowest of the types on the vari- 
ahles related to the overall work satisfaction picture. 

The vast majority of people in this sample, over 89%, 
were at least somewhat satisfied with the kind of work they 


304 The Uses of Type 


Table 12.20 The Types Expressing the Most and Least Work Satisfaction and Likelihood 
to Leave, and the Highest and Lowest Income Levels in the National Sample 





IST} INT) 


Less satisfied with future 
opportunities 












ISFP 





ISTP INFP INTP 

















Low income Less satisfied with work Less satisfied with work 





Less satisfied with company 















Unlikely to leave Less satisfied with company Less satisfied with company 


Less satisfied with future 
opportunities 


Less satisfied with future 
opportunities 


Likely to leave Likely to leave 








ESER 





ESTP 


Less satisfied with company Likely to leave 





EST] ESF] 









Satisfied with work Satisfied with work 


Satisfied with company Satisfied with company 


Unlikely to leave 











Satisfied with work 
Satisfied with company 
Less satisfied with work 





Likely to leave 









ENTP 





Less satisfied with work 









ENF] ENT] 













Satisfied with work 







Satisfied with company 
Satisfied with future opportunities 


High income 





Unlikely to leave 





Note: All sixteen types were ranked from high to low on each variable. The top (or bottom) four types for each category are hsted with these two exceptions: 
(a) i the gap between the third and fourth types is greater than 3%, only three types are listed, (b) if the gap between any pair of the four top types is greater than 
3%, only those types above that gap are listed; e.g., "Satishied with future opportunities" is listed only for ENTJs. See Appendix for a description of the sample 


Soure National sample 


were doing. The types expressing the most satisfaction with 
their work were the EJ types. These include the dominant 
extraverted Feeling types (ENFJ, ESFJ), for whom external 
harmony is important, and the dominant extraverted Think- 
ing types (ENTJ aud ESTJ), for whom taking charge of their 
external environment is important. In this sample, 77.2% 
were at least “Somewhat Satisfied” with the organization for 
which they worked (with ESFJ and ENFJ the most satisfied), 
and 67.2% were at least “Somewhat Satisfied” with their 
future work opportunities, with ENTJs clearly the most satis- 
fed with the future. The type with the highest income level 
was ENT], and their polar opposites, ISFP, had the lowest 
incoinc levels. Those most dissatisfied appeared to be the IP 
group, especially the INPs who were dissatisfied with their 
work, their company, and their future work opportunities. 


In this sample, an average of 64.7% said they were “Very 
Unlikely” to leave their jobs within the next year, with those 
least likely to leave the ENTJ, ESFJ, and ISFP. In contrast, 
13.7% of this sample said they were “Very Likely” to leave 
their jobs within the next year. The types that indicated this 
most frequently were INTP INFP ENFJ, and ESFP The ENFJ 
group contains some contrasts; they were among both the 
most satisfied and the most dissatisfied types with their work. 
Perhaps ENFJs are not a passive group—they either like their 
work or they don't, and if they dont, they want to leave it. 
Their extraverted Feeling seeks harmony in the external envi- 
ronment. Clearly there are individual differences within type, 
and it would be interesting to further study this ENF} group 
in particular to learn more about those differences. By con- 
trast, another dominant Fecling type (but introverted) had a 


Table 12.21 


Average % of 
“Very Dissatisfied” 


Work Aspect Responses 
Opportunities for promotion 22.376 
Salary 15.076 
Amount of stress | 3.376 
Job security | 1.876 
Opportunities for accomplishment | 1.276 
Opportunities for learning 10.3% 
Opportunities to contribute to society 10.3% 
Predictability/stability of job 10.1% 
Working conditions (hours, vacations, benefits, etc.) 9.5% 
Opportunity to use talents or training 9.5% 
Respect | get 8.976 
Responsibility 4.476 
Day-to-day tasks 3.876 
People | work with 3.476 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 305 





Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction with Work Aspects in the National Sample 


Highest % &amp; Type Average % of Highest % &amp; Type 
of “Very “Very Satisfied” of ‘‘Very 
Dissatisfied” Responses Satisfied” 
32.0% INT] 19.6% 35.1% ENT] 
25.8% INF] 19.3% 28.9% EST] 
18.9% INFP 19.8% 29.7% ESTP 
19.7% INTP 39.0% 56.9% ENF| 
15.3% INFP 30.8% 31.4% ENT) 
14.4% ESTP 36.1% 56.9% ENF{ 
INFP 
16.7% ESTP 36.3% 54.1% ENT] 
17.4% INTP 32.376 23 S ESF] 
15.5% INTP 38.7% 48.4% INF] 
IS.S% ENTP 38.376 59.5% ENT] 
13.5% INFP 36.1% 48.6% ESF) 
8.6% INTP 41.276 52.9% ENF] 
S.9% ESFP 32.0% 41.7% ENT] 
10.0% INTP 45.976 60.0% ENF] 


Note: See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample 


different pattern. The ISFPs in the lowest income grouping 
were among those “unlikely to leave.” Perhaps their personal 
loyalty (dominant introverted Feeling) is more important 
than their pay and thus they stay at low-paying jobs. 

Table 12.21 presents the 14 aspects of work surveyed 
and provides the samples average percentage of “Very Dis- 
satisfied” responses along with that of the type most dissat- 
ished; the same information for the “Very Satisfied” 
responses is also included. This sample appears most con- 
cerned about “opportunities for promotion” (22.3% were 
“Very Dissatished" and 19.6% “Very Satisfied”), with the 
INTJs most concerned. The ENTJs were the most satisfied 
of the 16 types on this aspect. This national sample was 
least concerned about the people they work with (only 
3.496 were "Very Dissatished," while +45.9% were "Very Sat- 
isfied”). The INTPs were the most dissatisfied, while the 
ENFJs were the most satished with their colleagues. 

Table 12.22 reports the work aspects that are satisfiers to 
this sample (over 5096 of the type indicated they were "Very 
Satisfied”) and dissatishers (over 15% of the type indicated 
"Very Dissatishied.”) Of the 16 types in this sample, it appears 
in terms of both overall work satisfaction and particular 
aspects of work that the ENTJs are the most satisfied (least 
dissatished) and INTPs and INFPs, the most dissatisfied (least 
satisfied). Perceiving types followed by Introverted types 
seem to express the most dissatisfaction with aspects of their 
work. Perhaps the nature of work itself asks them to use their 
Extraverted and Judging sides more than they would like. The 
EJ types were least dissatisfied and most satisfied; perhaps 


work settings, with their expectations of interaction and clo- 
sure, more naturally appeal to people of these preferences. 

While occupational selection scems most related to the 
functions (ST, SE NE NT), work environment satisfaction 
seems most affected by the attitudes (1J, IP. EP, ED. How- 
ever, any type can be satisfied in work as well as dissatished; 
these are grouped data and need to be put into the individ- 
ual contexts. 


Turnover 


Turnover may result from unsuccessful job performance, 
changes in the market leading 10 downsizing, or job dissat- 
isfaction. Vocational research amply supports (a) the pre- 
diction of turnover from job dissatisfaction and (b) the fact 
that people perform better in a job when they are satisfied 
(Dawis, 1996). In reviewing the literature on type and 
turnover, the focus has been on job fit/misht and job dissat- 
isfaction. Hammer (19962) reviews research from the 1985 
MBTI Manual and other studies and concludes, 


Although few studies have heen conducted on turnover, those 
that are available provide some support for the proposition that 
types working in environments or jobs that are not a good 
match for their preferences are more likely to leave or to say 
they are going to leave than are those whose type provides a 
better fit for either the tasks or the environment. Future studies 
examining the relationship of type and turnover should heed 
Gardens (1989) finding that organizational size may be a 
mediating variable. One study has suggested that the type ol the 
managers in an organization may also be related to employee 
turnover. (p. +7) 


306 The Uses of Type 


€ — M —  —M—ÀÁ 





Table 12.22 The Greatest Dissatisfiers and Satisfiers in the Work Environment 








IST) ISFJ INF) INTJ 


































Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: 
Promotions Promotions Promotions Promotions 
Stress Salary Job security 


Salary 
















Satisfiers: Satisfiers: Satisfiers: Satisfiers: 








ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 
























Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: 
Promotions Promotions Promotions Promotions 
Job security Stress Salary 
Salary Accomplishment Job security 
Predictability 


Working conditions 















Satisfiers: Satisfiers: Satisfiers: Satisfiers: 








ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 



































Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: 
Promotions Promotions Promotions Promotions 
Societal contributions Job security Salary Salary 

Stress Stress Use talents 


Salary 
Accomplishment 














Satisfiers: Satisfiers: 


People | work with 


Satisfiers: 
People | work with 


Satisfiers: 





















EST] ESF] ENF] ENT) 








































Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: Dissatisfiers: 
Promotions Promotions Promotions 

Salary 
Satisfiers: Satisfiers: Satisfiers: Satisfiers: 





People | work with 
Responsibility 
Societal contributions 


People | work with 
Opportunity to use talents 
Learning 

Job security 
Responsibility 
Societal contributions 


Opportunity to use talents 
Societal contributions 

Job security 
Learning 
Accomplishment 



















Sn nn a a ae CS Ra MR ME RM CREME a RN C A MR NCC CONNMNNNCCNE 
Note: Dissatisfier: Over 15% of the type indicated "Very Dissatisfied”; Satisfier: Over 50% of the type indicated "Very Satisfied “ 
See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Sour e: National sample 


Garden (1989) studied computer professionals in both 
large and small companies. Those with I, N, and P prefer- 
ences expected to leave their employer if it were a larger 
company; perhaps they souglit more autonomy, which is 
likely to come in a smaller company. Those with S and J 
preferences said they were more likely to leave smaller com- 
panies, perhaps seeking the more detailed regimen of a 
larger company. Additional studies have not been published 
since this review by Hammer. Studies reported earlier on 
"likelihood to leave" are related to the turnover issue, but 
follow-up would be needed to see if those indicating the 
desire to leave actually did. 


Implications for Practitioners 


There are many factors that contribute to career satisfaction 
and dissatisfaction. Data from the national sample suggest 
possible areas of concern by type to explore first. However, 
even when an area of concern is identified, practitioners are 
urged to find the particular meaning for the individual. For 
example, although stress is a dissatisher for many ESTPs 
and ISEJs, they likely find different things stressful and 
probably would prefer different methods for handling the 
stress in their jobs. Some types such as ISFP, ISFJ, and ESFP. 
who report more dissatisfaction with their salaries and who 
indeed are the types with the lowest average salaries, may 
need coaching on how to negotiate for higher salaries or 
how to groom themselves to take on additional responsibil- 
ities for which they might receive higher pay. These types 
do not typically assert themselves with others. For ENTPs 
who are also dissatisfied with their salaries but are among 
the highest paid of the 16 types, the issue and its solution 
may be something different. 

Because the nature of work and the stability of jobs are 
changing, it is noteworthy that the areas of biggest concern 
include some that are unlikely to improve. Job security and 
promotional opportunities are decreasing, while stress is 


likely to increase. To help clients weather this new world of 


work, career counseling can help clients focus on their 
unique talents, some of which the MBTI might help point 
out; identify methods to teach clients to cope with stress 
and increase their natural resiliency; and encourage clients 
to take responsibility for their own career development. 


Interests 


Interests are also key components in careers. Holland's 
typology of persons and work environments is a major force 
in career psychology (Spokane, 1996) and is measured by 
assessing the interests of individuals. "Individuals seek and 
remain in congruent environments; and environments 
recruit, retain and reward congruent people. Congruence is 
assessed according to the degree of match between the 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 307 


vocational personality of an individual and the environ- 
mental type of an occupation or position" (Gottfredson &amp; 
Holland, 1996, p. 6). Thus, liking the activities associated 
with ones job and with the people doing the job leads to job 
satisfaction and tenure. 

The tenets of Holland's theory of vocational interests 
include the idea that both people and environments can be 
classified into six types: Realistic, Investigative, Artistic, 
Social, Enterprising, and Conventional (RIASEC); these are 
often displayed on a hexagon. Figure 12.1 delineates the 
hexagon and gives brief dehnitions of each vocational 
theme. The interests that are most closely related are next to 
one another on the hexagon, and those that are situated 
opposite each other are least related. Thus Realistic and 
Investigative are closely related whereas Realistic and Social 
are not. Within the Holland codes, people are more likely a 
combination of types, rather than just one; for example, a 
counselor may have a Social-Enterprising-Artistic (SEA) 
code. 

There are a number of instruments that measure inter- 
ests, and several have been correlated with the MBTI. Chap- 
ter 9, "Validity," provides information on several studies. 
Studies on the Strong Interest Inventory (Strong), the Kuder 
Occupational Intcrest Survey, the Opinion, Attitude, and Intci- 
cst Scales (OAIS), and the Vocational Preference Inventory 
(VPI) are included in Chapter 11 of the 1985 MBTI Manual. 
A summary and discussion of these studies and additional 
research also appear in Hammer and Macdaid (19923) and 
Hammer (19962). The latter also includes a summary of a 
study correlating type with the Career Occupational Prefer- 
ence System Intcrest Inventory (COPS). The most complete 
data on the relationship of the MBTI to interests is reported 
in the Strong and MBTI Career Development Guide by Ham- 
mer and Kummerow (1992 edition for the 1985 Strong and 
1996 for the 1994 Strong). 

Hammer and Kummerow (1996) report correlations 
ranging from 0.00 to .48 between the MBTI preferences and 
the Strong General Occupational Themes, which measure 
the Holland themes: 


m Realistic is moderately correlated with Thinking; its 
Opposite, Social, is moderately correlated with Feeling as 
well as Extraversion. 

m Artistic is moderately correlated with Intuition and Per- 
ceiving, as well as Feeling, whereas its opposite, Con- 
ventional, is moderately correlated with Sensing and 
Judging (opposite preferences on the MBTI). 

W Enterprising is moderately associated with Extraversion. 


Analyzing the correlations between the Strong General 
Occupational Scales and type preferences, Hammer 
(1996a) noted that the J-P scale showed the lowest and 
the fewest correlations with Strong Occupational Scales. 
Other publications (Hammer &amp; Macdaid, 1992b) suggest 
"that this scale is the one least likely to reflect an attraction 
to a particular occupational field. It more often can be used 


308 The Uses of Type 


Building, repairing, 
working with my 
hands, working 

outdoors 


Data or word 
processing, book- 
keeping, organiz- 
ing, operating 
computers 


Conventional (C) 


Selling, managing, 


persuading, influencing Enterprising (E) 


Figure 12.1 Holland's Vocational Types and Brief Definitions 
g yl 


Note: Definitions are from the MBTI research questionnaire (see Chapter 7). 


to suggest how an individual might structure his or her job 
in any field." 

Chapter 9 of this manual also contains two samples 
where Strong Interest Inventory data and Form M results are 
correlated. They confirm the results suggested above. In 
general, correlations between scales on the Strong and the 
MBTI preferences suggest that the results of the two instru- 
ments will, in general, suggest the same directions to 
clients. However, because the correlations are moderate at 
best when they exist, they indicate that both instruments 
(and hence personality and interest data) have unique con- 
tributions to make to the career counseling process. 


Interests and Self-Efficacy 
in the National Sample 


Social cognitive career theory and research (Lent, Brown, &amp; 
Hackett, 1996) suggest that “interests are strongly related to 
ones self-efficacy” (p. 400). What one believes he or she can 
do often leads to interests in that area. People are likely to 
pursue and persist in arcas where they have confidence in 
their abilities. To study the variables of self-efficacy or confi- 
dence, the performance of various work activities, and inter- 
ests, the national sample was asked to provide self-ratings on 
the RIASEC themes. The three questions asked were, 








Solving abstract 
problems, scientific 
activities, lab work 


Investigative (I) 


Creating or 







Artistic (A) appreciating art, 
music, literature 
Social (S) Helping others, 
teaching, counseling 





1. “How confident are you in your ability to perform the 
following activities,” with the choices of “Complete 
Confidence," "Much Confidence,” “Moderate Confi- 
dence," “Little Confidence,” and “No Confidence." 

. “How often do you perform the following activities in 
your current job," with the choices of "Almost 
Always,” “Sometimes,” “Rarely,” and “Never.” 

3. “How much do you like to do the following activities 

(whether or not you are good at it),” with the choices 
of “Like,” “Indifferent,” and “Dislike.” 


i) 


In career counscling we would likely concentrate our 
efforts at least initially on where the client feels he or she has 
at least moderate confidence in abilities, the activities the 
client is currently performing, and what the client likes. 
Table 12.23 presents basic information on this sample in the 
three categories of information coded by RIASEC responses. 
This sample liked all the Holland theme activities more than 
they performed them or had confidence in their abilities, 
except in the Enterprising area, in which performance and 
confidence were nearly equal. The most often performed 
tasks in this group were in the Social area, which is also the 
most liked area and where these respondents have the most 
confidence; Conventional was next. The least performed 
activities were in the Artistic and Investigative arcas. In the 


Table 12.23 


Activities 


Realistic (R) 


Investigative (I) 


mov —— uments 


Artistic (A) 


re———— — 


Social (S) 





E CIE MAC ser 


Enterprising (E) 





——— ÁTCC 


Conventional (C) 


Confidence in Abilities, Performing, and Liking 
for the RIASEC Codes in the National Sample 


Average % &amp; Range of Types 
for Confidence in Abilities 


50.976 
68.6% ESTP-28.675 INF| 


27.976 


64.6% ENT|- 12.276 ISFP 


38.476 
62.776 ENFP—23.0% ISTP 


69.2% 


95.8% ENT]-52.076 ISFP 


e ET ^ 


37.7% 


83.0% ENT]-16.776 ISFP 


37.4% 
61.5% INTJ+22.6% ISFP 


Average % &amp; Range of Types 


for Performing Activities 


28.9% 


ez 
32.2% ENTJ-2.6% ISFP 


8.0% 


37.0% 
53.9% ENF}-22.0% INTP 
30.1% 
60.2% ENTJH18.1% INTP 
36.2% 
58.0% INFJ-23.8% ISFP 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 309 





Average % &amp; Range of Types 


for Liking Activities 


73.3% 


83.9% INTP-63.7% INT] 


33.0% 
66.7% ENT|-16.275 ISFP 


57.876 

89.876 ENF|-42.9% ISTP 
79.6% 

93.8% ENFP—68.675 INTP 
35.576 

74.6% ENTJ-18.6% INF] 


39.1% 
50.2% ENF|-29.125 INFP 


Note: See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample 


Artistic, Realistic, Social, and Investigative areas, these 
respondents indicated they liked the activities much more 
than they perlormed them. They may wish to devise ways to 
include more of those activities in their work, if their work is 
at all flexible in its demands. Or these may be activities that 
could be included more often in peoples nonwork lives. 
When looking at the high and low percentages for each 
Holland code in Table 12.25 and noting the types associated 
with the endpoints of each range, it is apparent that people of 
different types like different activities. In some cases they are 
at the opposite ends from one another in terms of activities 
liked. For example, of the 16 types, ENTJs liked the Inves- 
tigative activities the most; ISEPs, their opposite, the least. 
Table 12.24 combines three pieces of information: 


m The codes of the top four types who had either “Com- 
plete” or “Much Confidence” in their abilities in those 
activities 

@ [he codes of the top four types who “Almost Always” 
used/performed those activities 

m The codes of the top four types who indicated “Like” to 
the activities 


Both genders are combined in this analysis. 

These data illustrate the pattern that what one has confi- 
dence in, one performs and also likes, at least in this sam- 
ple. These types and RIASEC themes emerge: 


gm Ihe NT functions, especially the ENT combination, 
appear to have the most confidence in that they indicate 
the highest confidence in two to four activity areas. They 
often enjoy the challenges of tackling new responsibili- 
ties and seem to show the confidence here in their abili- 
ties to do so. 

w Their polar opposites, the SF functions, do not show as 
much confidence. In no Holland theme area are they 
among the top four types with confidence in that area. 
Perhaps their more natural modesty has kept them from 
endorsing the extremes of these activities. They may need 
special encouragement and support when they strike out 
in new areas since their confidence may be lacking. 

m Investigative (abstract problem solving) appears to be a 
common theme for NTs. 

m Artistic is a common theme for NFs. Both typologies 
emphasize self-expression and communication. 

w STIs (with the exception of the ESTJs) often endorse the 
Realistic theme—hands-on, pragmatic activities appeal 
to STs. 

m Both dominant introverted Intuitives (INTJ and INFJ) 
have confidence in Conventional theme activities, some- 
thing somewhat unexpected from those who theoreti- 
cally focus on the hig picture. Perhaps it is in the orga- 
nizing of the data that they have a natural excuse to turn 
inward and make patterns out of the data. 


310 . The Uses of Type 


Table 12.24 Confidence, Performance, and Liking in Abilities for the Highest Ranked 
RIASEC Themes of the 16 Types in the National Sample 





























































IST) ISFJ INF] INT] 
Confidence: Confidence: Confidence: Confidence: 
Perform: R Perform: Perform: IAC Perform: | 
Like: Like: Like: Like: 

ISTP ISFP INFP INTP 

| Confidence: R Confidence: Confidence: A Confidence: RIC 

Perform: R Perform: Perform: G Perform: A 
Like: R Like: Like: A Like: 
















ESTP ESFP ENFP ENTP 


Confidence: RASE 
Perform: EC 
Like: 























Confidence: AS 
Perform: AS 
Like: 


Confidence: 
Perform: R 
Like: 


Confidence: 
Perform: R 
Like: RE 



















EST} ESF} ENF) ENT) 




























Confidence: Confidence: Confidence: Confidence: 
Perform: E Perform: SE Perform: SC Perform: IAE 
Like: E Like: Like: Like: 


Note. Based on the average of the self-ratings by each type. The four types with the highest percentages in each RIASEC cagetory are indicated above. For 
cxample, the highest “Confidence” in Realistic abilities was indicated by ISTP, INTP, ESTP, and ENTP There are these exceptions: (1) only three types were 
included when the "distance" to the fourth one was &gt;5%, e.g., "Performing" Investigative activities includes only ENT], INEJ, and tNTJ; (2) five types 
were included when the “distance” between the fourth and fifth types was within onc percentage point, e.g., “Confidence” in Artistic abilities is included 
for ENFP. ENFJ, INFJ, INFP, and ENTP See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source’ Nauonal sample 


B The INFJs may have some difficulty finding occupations — 8 For the ES types, their performance appears to be related 


that combine their two opposite codes, Artistic and Con- to their dominant functions. Extraverted Sensing types 
ventional; often it is difficult to use diametrically op- (ESTP and ESFP) perform Realistic activities, perhaps 
posed interests in the same occupation. The advent of reflecting the hands-on nature of those types. ESTJs 
computer graphics combining both Artistic and Conven- (extraverted Thinking dominant) perform Enterprising 
tional activities may help. Or perhaps there are two sub- activities, perhaps reflecting their desire to lead and per- 
samples of INFJs here: those who prefer Artistic and suade others. ESFJs (extraverted Feeling dominant) per- 
those who prefer Conventional activities. form Social-Enterprising activities, perhaps reflecting 
B INFPs have confidence in and like Artistic activities, yet their desire to help and lead people. 
they perform Conventional ones. Performing the oppo- 
site activities from what one likes may be creating the A second study of the links between interests, type, and 
tension that leads them to lower levels of job satisfaction self-efficacy is available on 231 graduate and undergraduate 
overall, as we saw in an earlier section. students from a large midwestern university. The study cor- 
B While Conventional correlates to Sensing and Judging at relates Form M results with the General Occupational 
the preference level, it does not do so when we look at Themes as measured by both the Strong and the Skills Con- 
the four letters put together into a type. Sensing types do fidence Inventory (Betz, Borgen, &amp; Harmon, 1996). The 
not rate themselves high on Conventional in the three latter is a measure of the self-efficacy or confidence an indi- 
areas of confidence, performance, and liking. Perhaps vidual has in his or her abilities to perform various activi- 
Sensing types are more cautious in general about rating ties; skills confidence is measured in each one of the six 
themselves highly on these, or any, activities. Conven- Holland themes. The MBTI preferences and function pairs 
tional shows up in some combination in every Intuitive (ST, SE, NE, NT) that relate statistically to each General Occu- 
type except for ENFP. Perhaps Intuitive types have per-— pational Theme (GOT) and Skills Confidence scale appear in 
formed these activities out of necessity and developed Figure 12.2. The preferences relate in expected ways to the 


their confidence and liking as a result. GOT themes. For example, Realistic, with its locus on 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling — 311 





SCI GOT 
P S T.P 






Realistic (R) 


SCIi GOT 
S.T.] SJ 
sie? NTNESE CSE NT 





Conventional (C) 


SCI GOT 
ET E 






Enterprising (E) 







Investigative (I) 


GOT SCI 
T i 
NT,ST»NESF NT &gt; NESF 










ST &gt; SF 
GOT SCI 
N,EP N,P 
NRENT»SREST NT»STSF 
NF &gt; SPSFE 
. GOT SCI 
Social (S) E, NEP E. N.FEP 
NESF&gt;ST NF&gt;ST 
NF &gt; NT NF &gt; NT 


Figure 12.2. MBTI Preferences and Function Pair Differences Associated with RIASEC General Occupational Themes (GOT) 
and Skills Confidence Inventory (SCI) in a Sample of College Students 


Note: All results are staustically significant at the .05 level or better. Pairs results are based on MANOVAS and post-hoc analyses. See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source. lowa State University 


hands-on activities, relates to Sensing, Thinking, and Per- 
ceiving; Investigative, with its abstract problem solving, 
relates more closely to Thinking; Artistic, with its self- 
expression and freedom, to Intuition, Feeling, and Perceiv- 
ing; Social, with a focus on helping people, to Extraversion, 
Intuition, Feeling, and Perceiving; and Conventional, with 
its focus on organization and accuracy, to Sensing and Judg- 
ing. The function pair pattern results also fit with type the- 
ory. A similar pattern emerges for the Skills Confidence 
Inventory data; what one has confidence in, one tends to 
like, and vice versa. The relationships reported were statisti- 
cally significant at least at the .05 level or better and seem to 
fit with type theory and the previous research. 


Implications for Practitioners 


Interests generally relate to type in the directions expected, 
but the size of the relationship is usually moderate to small, 
especially at the occupational level. Often types that are 
opposite from one another will have opposite interest pat- 
terns as well. Practitioners are urged to use interests to add 
to the power of personality type, not replace it. An Artistic 
EST] is likely quite different from an Artistic INFP. Both 
want to be creative yet likely will do so in quite different 
manners. For example, an Artistic EST] found work in the 


compensation and benefits area quite creative, while an 
INFP Artistic used his creativity as an author and university 
professor. An Enterprising ENFP will lead and persuade in 
a different manner than an Enterprising ISTJ. One Enter- 
prising ENFP became an attorney specializing in mediating 
conflicts between small businesses. Her Enterprising ISTJ 
husband is an executive in a computer company. Each set of 
information augments the other and increases the practi- 
tioners ability to help clients. 

Self-efficacy is another useful concept to explore with 
clients, and type seems to relate to what clients likely have 
confidence in performing. It may also provide paths to 
explore with clients. For example, do the ENTs really have 
skills in the areas in which they have confidence, or would 
some reality checking help them? Do the ISFs really lack 
skills since they report lower self-efficacy when compared 
to other types, or do they simply need more encouragement 
lo try some activities or to even acknowledge their own 
skill levels? Self-efficacy data related to interest patterns can 
suggest areas to focus on first, but as with any instrument 
they need to be put in the context of the individual. 

Kummerow and Hammer (1995) offer a workbook to help 
clients integrate results from the Strong and the MBTI and a 
guide (Hammer &amp; Kummerow, 1996) to assist practitioners 
with that integration. Starting Out, Starting Over (Peterson, 


312 The Uses of Type 


1995) and Real People, Real Jobs (Montross, Leibowitz, and 
Shinkman, 1995) also look at interests and personality. 
Grutter (19983, 1998h, 1998c) has three publications care- 
fully delineating the integration of the two instruments for 
those wanting to enrich their work lives or make a transi- 
tion to different roles or responsibilities. 


Values 


Both theory and research support the importance of work 
values in making career decisions (Brown, 1996). Options 
reflecting highly prioritized values are chosen when they 
are available. Thus career practitioners would do well to 
understand the values of their clients, since they likely are a 
driving force in a career decision. 

Hammer (19962) summarized five studies relating type 
to values or beliefs. Values seem to relate statistically with 
type preferences in ways that are to be expected, but, as 
with interests, they do not converge completely. For exam- 
ple, Sensing and Judging often relate to a desire for security 
and stability, while Intuition and Percciving often relate to a 
desire for creativity. 

Garden (1997) examined the career paths of 341 soft- 
ware technical professionals in small high-tech companies 
for motivation profiles and future career directions. In 
examining the eight preference poles, she found that all val- 
ued money and comfort, recognition and autonomy, sug- 
gesting that similarities within the profession, not type pref- 
erences, made the difference. However, in examining four 
possible career paths (managerial, technical, challenging 
project, own company), she found statistically significant 
type differences. For the larger type cells (215) she found 
these patterns: 


B Managerial path was chosen most often by ESTJ, ENFJ, 
IST]. 

B Technical path was chosen most often by INT]. 

m Challenging project path was chosen least often hy INFP. 

B Own company path was chosen most often hy ENTP 
and INTP 

B ENFPs sorted themselves nearly equally among the four 
paths. 


In a study of a media organization, Murry and Markham 
(1997) investigated how the collective personality of an 
organization, based on type, might shape the structure of 
their espoused values (based on Rokeach's work on values). 
While the samples in cach of the types were not large 
enough for separate analyses, for the ISTJs and ISFJs there 
was more of an emphasis on fitting in, predictability, a sin- 
gle culture, and rule orientation. NFs had the most congru- 
ence with the top values in this organization, which 
included an emphasis on quality, team orientation, flexibil- 
itv and fairness, security of employment, and innovation; 





the authors suggest this may be because of the creative 
nature of this media organization. 

Mitchell (I981) also studied work values in a sample of 
more than 800 employees in a banking organization. Sce 
Chapter 9 for more background information on his study. 
He identified these eight factors as organizational values: 


I. Happy family: harmonious interpersonal relationships 

with pleasant material surroundings 

Variety and challenge: latitude to work creatively on 

intellectually stimutating problems 

3. Achievement within the system: orientation toward 
climbing the corporate ladder 

4. Visible autonomy: free expression of views even when 
at odds with the social milieu 

5. Outgoing affiliation: satisfaction in being part of a 
group 

6. Business sociability: sociability with a purpose 

7. Financial analysis: scientific and intellectual curtosity 
about economic and financial matters 

8. Nurturing affiliation: developing loyalties, assisting 
others, and sharing 


n2 


The types with these as high and low values are listed in 
Table 12.25! 

For the SFs in this sample, “happy family" with harmo- 
nious interpersonal relationships was important; by theory 
SFs value harmony with others. This same value did not 
appear important to the sample of their opposites, the NTs, 
who are more likely to value their personal autonomy. In 
focusing on two opposite types such as ISFJ and ENTR, the 
same values never appear on both lists. What is important 
to one is not to the other. The EP group does not scem to be 
particularly oriented toward climbing the corporate ladder; 
they are generally free-spirited people, open to the moment. 
Climbing a corporate ladder likely requires working within 
a system and planning one’s career moves in advance, a 
style that likely does not appeal to EPs but docs to EST]s. 


Values of the National Sample 


The national sample was asked to indicate how important 
11 values were in their lives on a scale of "Very Important,” 
"Somewhat Important," “Somewhat Unimportant,” or “Not 
Important.” Results of responses listed as “Very Important" 
are shown in Table 12.26. 

The values ol greatest importance to the entire sample 
were “home and family" “health,” “financial security,” 
“relationships/friendships,” and “autonomy, freedom, and 
independence.” Over 50% of nearly every type valued 
these. Of much less importance to this sample were “com- 
munity service” and “prestige or status.” No type endorsed 
these as “Very Important” at a rate greater than 2596. 

Table 12.27 lists, for cach type, the five values most 
important to that type, as indicated by the average scores on 
that value. While there is a great deal of similarity between 
the values for every type, the differences are notable. 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 





Table 12.25 Organizational Values of the l6 Types 


IST) 


Low: Visible autonomy 


Low: Outgoing affiliation 
Financial analysis 


ESTP 


High: Visible autonomy 
Low: Achievement within system 
Financial analysis 


EST) 


High: Achievement within system 


ISFJ 
High: Happy family 
Low: Variety and challenge 


Visible autonomy 


ISFP INFP 


High: Happy family High: Nurturing affiliation 


Low: Variety and challenge 


ESFP 


High: Happy family 


Low: Achievement within system| Low: Achievement within system 


ESF) ENF] 


High: Happy family High: Nurturing affiliation 
Outgoing affiliation 


Business sociability 





313 


——— 


INT] 
High: Financial analysis 


Low: Business sociability 


INTP 


High: Visible autonomy 


ENTP 


High: Variety and challenge 
Visible autonomy 


Low: Happy family 


ENT) 
High: Financial analysis 


Low: Nurturing affiliation 


Source: From Type and Social Climate in a Large Organization, by W D. Mitchell, 1981, unpublished manuscript. Adapted with permission. 


Table 12.26 Values of the National Sample Ranked as “Very Important” 


Value 


Home and family 

Health 

Financial security 
Relationship/friendships 
Autonomy, freedom, independence 
Achievement and accomplishment 
Religion or spirituality 

Education, learning 

Being creative 

Community service 


Prestige or status 


Average % Highest % &amp; Type 
84.8% 97.9% ENT] 
75.4% 83.8% ESF] 
67.9% 76.0% EST] 
62.6% 79.5% ENFP 
60.9% 75.5% INTP 
51.4% 69.2% EST] 
45.2% 61.6% ESF] 
41.6% 64.1% ENF] 
30.8% 55.1% ENFP 
11.3% 24.1% ENF] 
7.6% 14.3% EST] 


Lowest % &amp; Type 
65.1% INT] 
55.3% INF] 
50.0% INF] &amp; INT] 
30.8% INT] 
53.9% ESF] 
37.8% |SFP 
22.2% INTP 
27.7% |SFP 
16.3% ISFP 

4.8% INT] 
0.0% INF] 


Note: See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source’ National sample. 


314 The Uses of Type 


Table 12.27 Each Type's Five Most Important Values 









IST] ISF]J INF] 



















Home/family Home/family Home/family Health 

















Financial security Health Health Home/family 
Health Financial security Friendships Achievement 
Autonomy Friendships Financial security Autonomy 


Achievement Autonomy Autonomy Financial security 


ISTP ISFP 



































Home/family Home/family Home/family Autonomy 


Financial security Health Autonomy Home/family 
Health (tie) Financial security Health Health 
Autonomy (tie) Friendships Friendships Financial security 
Friendships Autonomy Financial security Friendships 











ESTP 





ESFP ENFP ENTP 












































Home/family Home/family Home/family Home/family 

Health Health Friendships (tie) Autonomy 

Financial security Friendships Health (tie) Achievement 
Friendships Financial security Autonomy Financial security (tie) 
Autonomy Achievement Financial security Health (tie) 











EST] ESF] ENF} ENT) 



































Home/family Home/family Home/family Home/family 


Health Health Health Health 

Financial security Friendships Friendships Financial security (tie) 
Achievement Financial security Financial security Friendships (tie) 
Friendships Achievement Learning Achievement 





Note: See Appendix for a descnption of the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


w The only two types for whom “home/family” is not first ENFP; ENTPs are among the top four on "achievement," 
are INTJ and INTP, which given their more individualis- while their opposites, ISFJs, are not. Feeling types, who 
tic natures makes sense. , make their judgments based on values, endorse twice as 

m “Health” is among the top three values for every type many values as important as do the Thinking types. This 
except ENTPs, who place “home/family,” “autonomy,” pattern is particularly pronounced when comparing the 
and “achievement” ahead of it. They may be so busy four EF types with the four IT types. 


seeking challenges that they pay less attention to their 
inferior Sensing function and may place a lesser value on Implications for Practitioners 
health issues. 

m “Achievement” is an important value for all the TJ types 


GSIN ESI), ENT andor ESF ENPE and ESPE in directions expected from type theory. They are also 
me , “R i | unique pieces of information and warrant inclusion in the 


career counseling process. People within an occupation are 
more likely to share similar values than are people across 
occupational groups. There are also some common values 
among all types in this sample. Further studies on type and 


Personality type and values generally converge and diverge 


“Achievement” is not as important a value to the IP types. 
B “Learning” isa very important value only to the ENEJs. 
B “Autonomy” is important to all Introverted types plus 

three of the EP types. It is not as important to the EJ types. 


Table 12.28 presents these values in a slightly different for- values in other cultures, nationalities, and ethnic groups 
mat: For each of the 11 values, the four types endorsing the would be needed to see what indeed is common throughout 
“Very Important" statement the most frequently are included. the world. Practitioners are invited to read Chapter 14 of 
It appears that the values endorsed most highly by one type this manual for more background. 
are not endorsed as highly by its opposite. For example, one On an individual basis, values may play a large role in 


of the top four types valuing “financial security” is ISTJ, not careers. Practitioners can use the data presented here as a 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling — 315 


Table 12.28 For Each Value, the Four Types Most Often Endorsing 


"Very Important" in the National Sample 


IST) 


Financial security 


ISTP 
Autonomy 


ESTP 
Prestige 


EST) 


Health 

Financial security 
Achievement 
Prestige 


Health 
Spirituality 


ESFP 


Home/family 
Health 
Friendships 
Financial security 
Spirituality 
Prestige 


ESF] 


Home/family 
Health 
Friendships 
Financial security 
Spirituality 
Community service 
Prestige 


INF] 


Spirituality 
Learning 
Community service 


Autonomy 
Creativity 


ENFP 


Home/family 
Friendships 
Creativity 
Learning 
Community service 


ENF] 


Friendships 
Learning 
Creativity 
Community service 





INT) 


Achievement 


Autonomy 


ENTP 


Autonomy 
Achievement 


ENT) 


Home/family 
Achievement 
Learning 
Creativity 


Note: Those in boldface were chosen by at least 50% of that type. For each of the 11 values, the 16 types were ranked on the percentage endorsing the 
“Very Important" response. The four types with the highest percentages for each value appear in the table above. For example, the four types with the 
highest percentages indicating that "Home/family" 1s “Very Important” are ESFP, ENFP. ESF], and ENTJ. For the value of “Autonomy,” the four types 
highest on that were ISTP INFP INTP and ENTP See Appendix for a description of the sample. 


Source: National sample. 


way to compare their clients’ reactions with what is typical 
for their type. The data can serve as reassurance to clients 
that types may value different things, and that it is good to do 
so. An ENTP executive with multiple sclerosis was strug- 
gling with health and work issues; she couldnt seem to limit 
her work enough to reduce stress and hence control her ill- 
ness better. She found it affirming to know that ENTPs do 
place their autonomy ahead of their health. She was not act- 
ing in an unusual way for her type, but in her case it was an 
unhealthy way. She would need to pay more attention to her 


health because of her individual condition, while searching 
for ways to still maintain as much autonomy as possible. 

Another ENTP quite surprised himself when he turned 
down an outstanding job offer because it would mean relo- 
cating his high school-age son. He had been pursuing the 
value of achievement but realized that home/tamily was 
most important to him. Indeed, the data confirm chat 
home/family is the most important value to ENTPs (and to 
all types except INTPs and INTJs). The values data helped 
him see the bigger picture. 


316 The Uses of Type 





Career Decision Making 


At the heart of career counseling is carcer decision making. 
Any decision depends on good information and rational 
judgments, and type theory is based in perception (Sensing 
and Intuition), which involves gathering data, and in judg- 
ment (Thinking or Fecling), which involves making deci- 
sions. All major decisions need to involve each function: 
the Sensing facts, the Intuitive possibilities, the objective 
analysis of Thinking, and the values focus of Feeling. Also 
nceded are Introverted reflective time and some Extraverted 
action, as well as a time to stay open with Perceiving and a 
time to come to a conclusion with Judging. Thus carcer 
decision making includes not only the decision itself but 
also what goes into the decision and its implementation. 
Type concepts can help clients in all three activities. 

'acccara (1988) tracked a sample of 210 outplaced man- 
agers (mostly malc) and noted that on the average it took 
the Introverted types one month longer to find a new posi- 
tion than it took the Extraverted types at cvery level of com- 
pensation they studied. The Extraverted types are likely to 
have more contacts or at least make more contacts in the 
career search process and thus connect more quickly with a 
new employer. The Introverted types are likely to want to 
take in information and ponder it, and thus move more 
slowly and carefully through the job scarch process. 

Hammer (19962) reviews six studies relating career deci- 
sion/indecision with type. The studies, mostly of college 
students, provided evidence that Judging types demonstrate 
more career decisiveness than Perceiving types. Type theory 
would predict that Judging types would move toward 
closure and Perceiving types would move toward gather- 
ing options. The data on the other dichotomies, E-I, S-N, 
and T—-E did not show consistent relationships to career 
decisiveness. 

Freeman (1994) investigated the relationship between 
career maturity (using the Career Development Inventory) 
and type (using the MBTI) and found no statistically signifi- 
cant correlations between the two instruments. She sug- 
gested that career counselors accept different psychological 
type preferences as effective processes for making credible 
career decisions. Type theory would suggest there are a vari- 
ety of different strategies in making career decisions and 
that practitioners would do well to be open to them. 

Schadt (1997) studied the relationship of type to de- 
vclopmental issues of midlife women including career 
decision-making self-efficacy. She compared a group of 50 
midlife women to a control group ol 43 similar women. 
Overall she found that the career decision-making sell- 
efficacy of the treatment group women increased, although 
it did not reach statistical significance. 

Krumboltz (1992) offers another perspective on career 
indecision, focusing on the social pressure accompanying 


the word indecision. He believes career indecision is treated 
almost as a mental disorder by some professional coun- 
selors, yet learning how to make a career decision is not 
necessarily a legitimate activity in U.S. society. He suggests, 
"Open-mindedness can be viewed as a virtue. Kecping ones 
options open may be far preferable to stating goals which 
may or may not be possible of attainment and which could 
lead to frustration and unhappiness" (p. 244). In his Career 
Beliefs Inventory (CBI) Krumboltz (199]) identifies 25 
scales measuring career beliefs that may keep people from 
attaining their carcer goals. In a sample of adults seeking 
career counseling there were no significant correlations 
between type and the beliefs blocking career goal achieve- 
ment as mcasured on the CB] (Hammer, 1996a). Thus type 
appears to be independent of behaviors blocking career goal 
achievement, at least in this research study. 


Implications for Practitioners 


Since the perceiving (S-N) and judging ( T—F) functions are 
such an important part of career decision making, it is use- 
ful 10 pay attention to how clients are using their functions. 
The J-P dichotomy based in type dynamic theory focuses 
on which function is extraverted. J-P itself, like all the 
dichotomies, contains neutral terms, with neither pole being 
better or worsc. However, the overuse ol either one may cir- 
cumvent the career development process. Judging types 
may use their thinking or feeling functions to quickly make 
decisions and perhaps not gather enough information. 
Implementing the decision may be more difficult as a result. 
They may find it helpful to caution themselves against 
quick decisions and take the tack that “my plan is to stay 
open." Perceiving types may find themselves enjoying the 
search for options and thus avoid any decision that would 
close off any potentially interesting option. With them a 
useful tack may be to spend more time looking at what 
doors remain open with each career decision rather than 
which doors have been shut. 

Introduction to Type and Careers (Hammer, 1993) delin- 
cates a career exploration process for each of the 16 types 
including a preferred method for each type, potential obsta- 
cles, and tips. Levin, Krumboltz, and Krumboltz (1995) 
offer a workbook for integrating MBTI, Strong, and Carecr 
Beliefs Inventory information. Type dynamics, discussed 
later in this chapter, also offers suggestions for counselors 
regarding career exploration including decision making. 

Our task in thc long run is not just to help people find 
satisfying jobs and work environments now but also to pre- 
pare them for thc many career/job searches they will be per- 
forming throughout their lives. We need to teach strategies 
for making decisions, dealing with change, handling stress, 
and visioning, and for identifying and locating “new jobs” 
based on the abilities clients possess or on the skills they 
can learn. 


Other Factors Influencing 
Career Counseling 


[here are any number of other factors that might influence 
career counseling, and some of those have been studied in 
relationship to the MBTI. Ethnicity may be one such factor. 
In a study of 231 African Americans, Gchringer (1994) 
found that for five occupational groups there was a similar 
distribution to occupational groups representative of a 
national sample. The four occupational samples that dif- 
fered from the national sample were more heavily IST], the 
modal type in the African American sample. 

Job performance also may be a factor in career develop- 
ment; see Chapter 13 for a review of these issues. Addi- 
tional personality measures that often describe behaviors 
on the job, such as the California Psychological Inventory 
(CPI), the Adjective Check List, and the California Q-Sort, 
have been reported in Thorne and Gough (1991) as well as 
the 1985 MBTI Manual. Chapter 9 and Chapter 10 of this 
manual also contain relevant studies. 


Four Levels of Type Interpretation 
in Career Counseling 


Hammer (1996a) discusses three levels of type interpreta- 
lion: static, dynamic, and developmental. A fourth level, 
behavioral, can be added with the advent of the MBTI Step 
Il (formerly the Expanded Analysis Report). These levels, 
with relevant applications to career counseling, are dis- 
cussed below. 


Static Level 


The static level is the basic and most widely used method 
when focusing on carecr counseling. 1t encompasses a gen- 
eral understanding of cach of the dichotomies, combina- 
tions of preferences, and the 16 types. People of the same 
preference, combination of preferences, or whole type share 
many characteristics in common; individual differences are 
ignored at this level. This approach is used when career 
counselors rely solely on type descriptions to understand 
clients, when clients self-assess, and when trends in job 
selection by type are calculated with both the frequencies of 
the particular type within a job and the frequencies com- 
pared to a base population. 

As John Holland (1994) says, "In general, the strengths 
ol typologies lie in their ability to organize information. In 
contrast, the weaknesses of typologies lie in their neglect ol 
the processes entailed in change and development" (p. 50). 
Much ol the information presented in this chapter is of the 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 317 


———— 


static nature and has been a useful way to organize data 
about personality and careers. It docs not take into account 
individual uniqueness nor does it allow lor change and 
development. While the static level is well researched and 
very uscful, nonetheless career counselors are urged also to 
incorporate the other levels and morc fully use all of type 
theory. 


Dynamic Level 


The dynamic interpretation locuses on the interplay be- 
tween and among the preferences within the type, specifi- 
cally how inlormation is perceived and how decisions are 
made. (See Chapter 3 for more information.) As a review, 
cach type has a dominant or lead function with an auxiliary 
function for balanec. If the dominant function is a perceiv- 
ing one (Sensing or Intuition), the auxiliary function is a 
judging one (Thinking or Feeling) and vice versa. This 
means a person has access to ways of both gathering data 
and making decisions about these data. Each person also 
has preferred ways, either Extraverted or Introverted, of 
expressing the dominant and auxiliary functions, thus 
enabling the person access to both the internal and external 
worlds, although one arena will still be the favorite. In 
terms of type, well-developed people have good balance 
between Perceiving and Judging and between Extraverting 
and Introverting; they do not use them equally, but they 
have conscious access to both sides. Thus they have a pre- 
ferred means of gathering data and making decisions, as 
well as personality mechanisms allowing thein to both 
reflect and act. Each type also has a tertiary function and a 
fourth, or least-preferred, function (also called the inferior), 
which tend to be less developed and less used. The pre- 
lerred order of the functions from dominant to inferior is 
the same for everyone of the same type, but the conscious 
and appropriate use of the four functions may depend on 
the persons type development (scc the next section). 

Using the dynamic approach helps counselors ascertain 
activities that are likely to be important and interesting to 
clients. It also helps identify how people are functioning in 
the use of their type including looking at issues of balance 
and imbalance. Type dynamies can be used to improve 
career decision making. For example, dominant extraverted 
Intuitives (ENTP and ENFP) may find the continual identi- 
fication of career possibilities very appealing. However, 
without taking time to turn inward and evaluate these pos- 
sibilities (i.c., use their introverted judging function), they 
may find themselves on a perpetual merry-go-round of 
activity. Dominant introverted Intuitives (INTJ and INEJ) 
may find themselves endlessly forming internal visions of 
whats possible for them and may need at times to discuss 
their visions with others to help access their extraverted 
decision-making functions. The necessity of accessing both 
the dominant and auxiliary processes in the appropriate 
attitudes is important to all clients. 


318 The Uses of Type 


Another way to illustrate the impact of type dynamics in 
working with clients is based on work incorporating the Risk 
Taking/Adventure scale of the Strong Interest Inventory with 
type dynamics. Kummerow and Hammer (1995) examined 
four type combinations in relationship to risk taking: NP. NJ, 
SP. SJ. Risk taking often involves acting on ones perceptions, 
hence the preference combinations. Type dynamics, which 
involve the extraverting or introverting of that perceiving 
function, make a difference in risk-taking styles. 


@ NPs extravert their Intuition whether its dominant or 
auxiliary; they are out in the world seeing options and 
possibilities. These types generally are the greatest risk 
takers (although occasionally they do not see themselves 
as such). They like finding an interesting possibility and 
trying it. Kummerow and Hammer (1995) describe the 
NP style as likely to “jump into new possibilities or 
move into completely new directions, especially at the 
conceptual level” (p. 17). They may need help turning 
inward to their judging function, either Thinking or 
Feeling, to help them prioritize their possibilities. One 
ENFP in her mid-20s was caught in a web of possibili- 
ties—science museum volunteer coordinator, fund- 
raiser for a childrens theater, bookstore manager, social 
worker for abused women, small business owner grow- 
ing medicinal plants or perhaps boarding pets, and so 
forth. She felt she was “leaping like a lunatic” into all 
these interesting possibilities. It was only when she took 
time to look at her own priorities and needs that she 
gained focus. 

B The SP by contrast extraverts Sensing, scanning the 
environment for the most interesting piece of data and 
then following it. SPs are likely to “take immediate risks 
if the situation demands it.” They prefer “long-term 
security—home and familiar people are important" 
(Kummerow &amp; Hammer, 1995). SPs may also need to 
slow down and introvert to evaluate the most important 
pieces of data. An ISTP sales representative continually 
changed jobs, always seeing something better in the next 
one. As he noted, his résumé looked like Swiss cheese. 
Every other aspect ol his life (home, family) was quite 
stable. He needed help in analyzing what the next job 
would really be like (using his introverted Thinking 
function), not just how it looked at the moment. In addi- 
tion, he required help identifying the long-term risks 
and the bigger picture. 

B NJs introvert their Intuition. They need to have an inter- 
nal vision of whats important to them before they will 
move to action. Sometimes that vision comes easily, 
sometimes not. They find it nearly impossible to move to 
action until that vision is in place. Kummerow and Ham- 
mer (1995) describe them as willing to “take long-term 
risks for the sake of strongly held ideals." They prefer 
"careful analysis and preparation for risks." One ENT], 
recently divorced, said that until she had a vision of what 
was important to her—that is, keeping her children with 


her as much as possible while earning maximum dol- 
lars—she felt unable to find a job. With that vision, she 
could move to action. She found an on-the-road sales job 
in a resort arca for the summer, where she could drive 
her children along. The calls to customers were short 
ones, and her children could entertain themselves safely 
in the car. Each evening was a special time together in a 
motel. 

B SJs introvert their Sensing, and they “will take moderate 
risks after long thought and preparation.” They prefer 
“to stick with what works” and are “least willing of the 
combinations to take risks” (Kummerow &amp; Hammer, 
1995), One described herself as “staying parked until Pm 
pushed out.” SJs need time to access their memories and 
experiences as well as to gather more information and 
ponder it. They like to come up with several plans before 
proceeding, and all that takes time. One IST] was 
unhappy with his current work situation as an office 
supervisor. He considered (plan A) transferring to 
another branch, (plan B) finding a new employer, and 
(plan C) setting up his own office services business. 
While he was exploring each of these, plan A worked 
out and he is now quite happy in his new location. 


Hammer and Kummerow (1996) present data indicating 
that those who introvert a dominant perceiving function 
(ISFJ, ISTJ, INEJ, and INTJ) score lowest in risk taking on 
the Strong scale. The act of taking in data (whether its in 
factual or big picture form) seems to decrease the willing- 
ness to take risks. They also noted that for one sample, the 
FJ types (all of whom extravert Feeling, whether its domi- 
nant or auxiliary) also are lower on risk taking; perhaps the 
act of harmonizing with one’s external environment affects 
the willingness to take risks. 

More illustrations of the impact of type dynamics on 
career counseling interventions are provided by Heavrin 
(1998). She presents case studies demonstrating how the 
dominant and auxiliary can work together well in an INTP 
client, what happens when the auxiliary is not accessed in 
an INFJ client, and what occurs with an ENFP when the 
dominant and auxiliary are both used in the same attitude 
(Extraverted) instead of opposite E-l attitudes. 

Through the inclusion of type dynamics, career coun- 
selors can work with clients to round out their information- 
gathering and decision-making strategies. Practitioners can 
be alert to when type dynamics are out of balance in their 
clients and suggest remedies so that clients can access all 
parts of their personalities. 


Developmental Level 


The developmental approach to type recognizes that each 
type has an "ideal" order of development over time: Early in 
life the dominant function emerges and then the auxiliary, 
so that by the time one enters the work world, both are 
accessed and functioning together. The tertiary and finally 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 319 


Table 12.29 Merging Super's Life-Span Stages with Type Development 


Super's Stages/Ages 


Growth (4-13) Becoming aware of the future. 


Finding ways to develop competencies and to 
achieve, in order to increase control over ones life. 


MÀ M M M e ee T tm ah RI menm mem 


Exploration (14—24) 
occupational choice. 


p Duit ———————— 


—— 





Establishment (25—44) Stabilizing, consolidating, and possibly advancing in 
career(s). 

Maintenance (45—65) Holding on (stagnating or plateauing). 
Keeping up (updating or enriching). 
Innovating (changing). 

Disengagement (over 65) Deceleration. 


Retirement planning. 
Retirement living. 


Super's Career Development Tasks 


Crystallizing, specifying, and implementing an 


UA E e ge t e n Ha S 5 a e M us PS S eh het 


Hypothesized Type Development Sequence 


Dominant (1) function emerges and becomes guiding 
force in life. 


Auxiliary (2) function develops and helps balance 
dominant. 


MA erret eret nh mm on EE, Lm = mL MER. Eum € 


Dominant and auxiliary functions are working 
together well. 


Tertiary (3) function may begin to emerge. 





———————— — m emr EEE E EErEE O T 


Tertiary function may be drawn in to keep those who 
are holding on from stagnating. 

For those who are keeping up or innovating, tertiary 
function may provide new directions and behaviors. 


Inferior function (4) may emerge in importance and 
also help provide new directions and behaviors. 


Conscious inclusion and integration of all four 
functions. 


a eee Tee eee 


Source: From “The Life-Span, Life-Space Approach to Careers,” by D. E. Super, M L. Savickas, and C M Super, 1996, in Career Choice and Development Grd ed.), San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, and Counseling the Less Preferred MBTI Functions for Career Transition and Disengagement, by J Grutter, 1993, paper presented at the Association for Psychological 


Type Conference, Newport Beach, CA. Used with permission. 


the fourth function are often accessed more in midlife and 
beyond. Integration of all the functions is a natural interest 
and task in the second half of life. Theoretically, then, there 
are 16 paths to development depending on the individuals 
type. 

Supers conceptualizations of a life-span approach to 
career development (Super, Savickas, &amp; Super, 1996) are 
applicable, and Grutter (1990, 1993) has provided both 
theory and applications to help us bridge between life-span 
stages and type development. Table 12.29 provides a sum- 
mary of this bridging. 

As an illustration of these concepts, we will examine the 
tvpe (and career) development of four EJ friends (ESTJ, 
ESFJ, ENFJ, ENTJ) who all received graduate degrees in 
counseling psychology. They are in the maintenance stage 
of their careers, although the cases will take the reader 
through the exploration and establishment stages as well 
(see Tables 12.30-12.33). Those types with the same func- 
tion pairs (ST, SE NE and NT) are likely to notice similar, 
although not identical, patterns in their work lives. It is also 
difficult to separate the individual preferences from one 
another, since type is a dynamic whole; for the sake of the 
illustrations this was attempted. 

These four friends made initial career choices based on 
their dominant functions, and all have gained comfort 
using all four functions in their work. The less-preferred 


functions act to support the dominant and auxiliary ones. 
They each have two favorite functions they like to rely on 
the most and with which they feel most at easc, and they 
also enjoy using their third and fourth functions in their 
work and in their lives. 

For those working with midlife career changers, knowl- 
edge of type development concepts is particularly useful. 
Navigating Midlife (Corlett &amp; Millner, 1993) offers much 
information using typology as a guide to that process. Grut- 
ter (1990) offers three case illustrations using type with 
clients in Supers maintenance stage of their careers. 1n one 
of her cases she tracks the career development of an ESFP 
high school coach and counselor. His tertiary (Thinking) 
emerged partially with his return to graduate school for a 
degree in counseling. He became particularly interested in 
career counseling using computerized programs with high 
school students, especially those who are at risk. He'll use 
his Intuition (fourth function) in helping them find possi- 
bilities and in helping himself look for new ways to keep 
current in his field. 

Within some clients, counselors may identify that a func- 
tion has been “skipped” or at least overlooked and encour- 
age the client to try more of its activities. For example, an 
INFP client spent so much time in childhood and early 
adulthood developing his analytical side that he missed 
opportunities to develop his dominant Feeling function. 


320 The Uses of Iype 





Table 12.30 One ST's Career and Type Development 


For ESTJs 

|: extraverted Thinking (dominant) 

2: introverted Sensing (auxiliary) 

3: Intuition (tertiary) 

4: introverted Feeling (least preferred) 





ST 








Thinking 
Sensing 


This EST] began her working career as a secretary and administrative assistant, where she could use her organizing and office 
skills to efficiently manage the details and work flow. But she always knew she wanted more education and more responsibility. 

Since she knew the university system from growing up in an academic family and since she liked managing, she decided 
being a dean of students would be a good choice.The graduate program she chose had emphasized student personnel work 
in the past but became a counseling program, an unexpected turn for her but one she decided to live with. While doing well 
in graduate school, she nonetheless describes the counseling portion of the training as difficult. Her Intuitive and Feeling 
functions were being called upon before she was comfortable using them. She did enjoy the academic counseling job she 
held, especially when she was a coordinator of counselors, where she could use her preferred functions most. 

She went into a research job upon completion of a doctorate in part because she was not geographically mobile due to 
her husband' position and in part because it fit with her training and personality. Next was a position for more than a 
decade with a consulting firm conducting job assessments based on testing and interviews. The position was part-time, 
enabling her to spend time with her two children. Her interests led her to training other professionals about psychological 
tests and writing practical guides about those tests. Since this was outside the mainstream of her employer's activities, it 
became increasingly difficult to fit in. 

She began her own small consulting business to allow herself a variety of work. She finds the training and writing move 
her toward seeing the big picture and staying current with the theories, as well as recognizing what's really important to the 
people with whom she works. In her individual work with clients in career counseling, she finds herself more easily tuning in 
to their emotions and values, something she would have avoided earlier in her practice. While she still enjoys relying most 
on her Sensing and Thinking, the use of her other functions helps her do her work better. 


Intuition 
Feeling 


Table 12.31 One SF's Career and Type Development 


For ESFJs 

l: extraverted Feeling (dominant) 

2: introverted Sensing (auxiliary) 

3: Intuition (tertiary) 

4: introverted Thinking (least preferred) 








This ESF} grew up in a small midwestern town where being a minister was an exceedingly important job—that's what 

Feeling he decided to do as a way of helping people and as a way of alleviating the guilt he felt after causing 2 childhood accident. 

Sensing After graduating in English, he entered the seminary and during his internship realized he was in the ministry for the wrong 
reasons. So he fell back on his plan B and became a high school teacher of English (which is what his mother had done). 
SFs often choose jobs based on the influence of important people in their lives and for security. 

He felt teaching was a natural activity for him, and he loved it, particularly the grammar and expository writing classes 
with the "rules" involved; he stayed away from creative writing. He got a master's degree in counseling because he was 
always being asked for help from his students and friends, and he sought more ways to help them. In addition, his profession 
required continuing education credits. He found the Thinking aspects of graduate school both intimidating and interesting. 
But he never planned to leave the classroom. Unfortunately, at the time there was a decline in student enrollment, and he 
was forced out of a job he had planned to be in all his life. He knew the necessity of the change three years before it hap- 
pened, so he had plenty of time to prepare. 

He moved into training and career counseling in a business organization. He has become what he calls a personal coach to 
hundreds of managers. He is now working inside a large financial company in organizational development work and is quite sur- 

Intuition prised to find he gets excited about the unpredictable. He never knows which Intuitive direction he will need to go in, but now he 
enjoys the flow; something will feel right in the moment. He works with people's fears and angers, getting them to face up to their 
emotions and to their relationship issues. He often consults with problem managers, gathering objective data from others about 

Thinking | them. He likes analyzing the data and presenting it in a way that is objective, fair, and shows that he has their best interests at heart. 

He helps people tell the truth to one another in a kind manner. He has to be creative in coming up with possible ways to work on 

their problems. His is a very applied approach to helping people, and it incorporates all his functions. 

Like his EJ friends, his personal life has affected his professional life. He is gay, and he found it a relief to let his co-workers know 
this. However, with his clients, he is concerned some will feel this as an obstacle to working with him and thus has kept it 
private. His focus has been on the comfort of others, not on himself, in sharing this important part of his life. 


Uses of Type in Career Counseling 321 


Table [2.32 One NF's Career and Type Development 


NF For ENFJs 
I: extraverted Feeling (dominant) 
2: introverted Intuition (auxiliary) 
3: Sensing (tertiary) 
4: introverted Thinking (least preferred) 





Feeling 
Intuition 
Sensing handle all those facts. 


Thinking 





This ENF} became a nun and a teacher because the nuns provided her the support and self-esteem that was missing from her 
own family as well as a model for how women could contribute to the world.These extraverted Feeling reasons were her 
foundation.The specifics of what she did as a nun were less important than the overall ability to influence peoples lives for the 
better (NF). So when the religious order decided she would be a math and chemistry teacher, she did so gladly. She could easily 


As a teacher she kept finding herself in a counseling role with student and parental requests for help. She decided she 
wanted to learn more about counseling and enrolled in graduate school; she liked developing her Thinking side while in school. 

She left the convent, married, and adopted children. In subsequent jobs as a community college counselor she found herself 
providing more academic counseling (requiring more ST than she enjoyed) than personal counseling, so she moved to private 
practice. She has built a practice with eight staff people and provides a variety of services where her NF desire to help people 
(individuals, couples, groups, fledgling counselors) flourishes. 

She is always sharpening her skills and keeping current on the Thinking side of her work, and she practices what she 
preaches to her clients in taking care of the here-and-now aspects (Sensing) of her own life—exercise, nutrition, meditation, 
leaving her work at work, collegial support, continued learning through reading and workshops, avocational interests, and time 
alone. She leads a balanced life with her four functions. 


Table 12.33 One NT’s Career and Type Development 


NT For ENTJs 

l: extraverted Thinking (dominant) 

2: introverted Intuition (auxiliary) 

3: Sensing (tertiary) 

4: introverted Feeling (least preferred) 





Thinking 
Intuition 


This ENT] chose her career path logically. She wanted to travel and influence the world, hence a job teaching in the Peace Corps 
in Asia. She would have change, variety, and many possibilities. Her next job was a logical choice also: While her husband was in 


graduate school she took a job at the same university as an academic counselor. This confirmed her comfort in the academic life 
(her father was a professor), and she pursued a graduate degree in counseling. ' 

Her subsequent jobs also followed a logical progression from counseling to counselor supervision to training, and they 
offered her opportunities for change, challenge, and learning (often motivators for NTs). She had a series of jobs but moved 
from academia and nonprofit organizations into the corporate world after a divorce and the (logical) realization she would 
have to earn more money to support herself and her children.She has continually progressed to more responsibility and 
larger management roles where she can concentrate on the big picture and put programs into place that will have a positive 


effect on the company. 


She describes how she is compelled to incorporate Sensing and Feeling in her work as well: As a human resources execu- 


Sensing 


tive she must keep track of many details—she describes it as “tons of factual information" —and she does so in part by hiring 


the right people for the right job and keeping lots of lists. She finds she must continually get out of her own head and away 


Feeling 


from what appears rational to her in order to figure out why/how people are reacting from their hearts.VVork requires her to 


always consider the values driving people and relationships.She has found ways to access all four of her functions well. 


Alter a career start in engineering, he realized later that he 
felt he was missing something (in this case his Feeling func- 
tion); he tuned into what was important to his values and 
moved into training, something morc in tune with his Feel- 
ing values. 

At times in clients’ lives some functions take on more 
salience than previously, and the sequence of type develop- 
ment likely identifies which of those functions it is. It may 


be necessary to help clients integrate their understanding of 


this process. For example, managers who are Thinking types 
may in midlife become much more interested in mentoring 


others and developing a legacy of good relationships; this is 
their emerging Feeling function, which is either their ter- 
tiary or inferior. An INTP researcher moved into manage- 
ment in midlife and found much satisfaction in teaching 
others research skills. He would stop what he was doing 
when his staff entered his office and give them his undi- 
vided attention as he answered their questions, encourag- 
ing their inquiries and gently teaching them skills. Fecling 
types may find themselves pulled toward more formal and 
theoretical activities such as schooling which emphasize 
logical analysis as a way of developing their Thinking sides, 


322 The Uses of Type 





or they may find conflict situations interesting instead of 
somcthing to be avoided. An ENFP found the study of law 
quite fascinating and enjoyable in midlife; she couldn't 
believe how much fun it was to analyze a case, an activity 
she could not have imagined herself undertaking several 
ycars earlier. Thus she made a career transition from fund- 
raiser to law student in midlife. Sensing types may find 
scarching for patterns and studying theories much more 
engrossing in the second half of their lives. Intuitive types 
may find that developing a detailed and factual base on a 
topic of interest holds their attention later in life. Extraverts 
are often surprised as they age how much they enjoy their 
introverted time; this would be a natural part of their 
accessing their Introverted functions. Introverts also report 
more willingness to extravert in the second halt of life 
regarding the things that are important to them. Fitzgerald 
(1997) provides additional framing and examples of this 
process in managers and leaders. Creative Aging (Millner, 
1998) provides in-depth portraits of the 16 types and their 
type development. 


Behavioral Level (or MBTI Step 1l) 


The MBTI Step Il is a scoring method that results in not only 
the four-letter type but 20 ways, or subseales (5 per 
dichotomy), in which that type expresses itself. Its results 
illustrate the unique expression of each type. For example, 
part of Extraversion is an enjoyment of talking and express- 
ing one’s views. However, it is possible to be an Introvert and 
also to prefer talking a great deal to others (Expressive). As 
another example, some Extraverted types prefer one-to-one 
relationships (Intimate), not opportunities to be in large 
groups engaging in networking aetivities (Gregarious). 

This level of understanding is very helpful in the career 
search and decision-making process. It suggests possible 
strategies and behaviors that are likely to come more easily 
to the client and those that are more difficult. Even for 
those who are clear in their preferenecs, the understanding 
of the specific behaviors within those preferences is useful. 
For example, one ISF) who preferred Receiving (1) realized 
that to make the necessary contacts in a department she 
was interested in transferring to she needed to use Initiating 
(E). Her Step H results helped her understand why those 
tasks were likely to be difficult but also gave her specific 
ideas about how Initiaung people might go about the task. 
She made the contacts, found her dream job, and now is 
using another part of her personality, her Systematic (J) 
side, to keep her name in front of that department. 

For others, understanding of their subscales helps them 
better incorporate parts of themselves that scem in opposi- 
tion. For example, decision-making behaviors on the Step 
II are represented by a combination of scores on two sub- 
scales: Logical-Empathetie (ideal decision-making strategy) 
and Reasonable-Compassionate (actual deeision-making/ 


implementation strategy). An ENT] was experiencing some 
conflict in her decision making. She was Empathetie (F) in 
the ideal but Reasonable (T) in her actual style. She would 
find herself torn between wanting to help people by 
empathizing and agreeing with them and using her logic to 
make a decision. Once she understood the confliet she 
started using the Empathetie (F) to lead her to data to 
weigh, and relied more on her preferred Thinking side for 
the actual decision. Decisions are much easier for her now. 

Since the focus of this manual is on Step I, readers who 
are interested in exploring Step Il are invited to study these 
resources: Saunders (1989), Kummerow and Quenk (1992), 
Quenk and Kummerow (1996), and Mitchell, with Quenk 
and Kummerow (1997). Step II results are available only 
from Forms J and K of the MBTI. 


Implications for Practitioners 


Each level of type interpretation adds to both the client's 
self-understanding and the practitioners ability to help the 
client with career counseling activities. The static level 
helps with a basic understanding of type characteristics. 
Type dynamics add an interplay between the preferences, 
which leads to fuller decision making and more balance 
within clients’ lives. Type development provides a path to 
development and suggestions of emerging issues for clients 
along with the hope of continued growth. The MBTI Step H 
points out the unique ways in which each type is expressed, 
which offer clues to accessing the behaviors inherent in 
each subscale pole. All levels ean be used interchangeably 
with clients, and they build on one another. 


Administering and Interpreting the 
MBTI in Career Counseling Settings 


Practitioners must first determine if the MBTI is an appro- 
priate tool to use, and second, administer it properly. Third, 
they nced to spend time verifying type with clients, recog- 
nizing that how clients answered the Indicator may have 
heen affected by their work activities and may not be the 
“best-fit” type. General issues and guidelines for adminis- 
tration and interpretation have been covered in Chapters 5 
and 6, and specifie issues related to counseling and psy- 
chotherapy settings are in Chapter 10. The following issues 
are unique to a career counseling setting. 


I. When should 1 use the MBTI? 
In any career counseling practice the practitioner 
must first determine what information is needed to 
aid the career counseling process and then which, if 
any, instruments are to be administered to help pro- 
vide that information. In part this will depend on the 


I 


clients issues and state of mind. Usually a framework 
for understanding one’s personality adds greatly to 
the career counseling process. Thus in general the 
MBTI is appropriate to administer to clients who are 
functioning “normally” and who have at least an 
eighth-grade reading level. A survey by Graff, Larri- 
more, Whitehead, and Hopson (1991) identified the 
MBTI as one of the three most widely used instru- 
ments in college settings; the other two were the 
Strong Interest Inventory and the Self-Directed Search, 
both of which are vocational interest assessments. 
Schadt (1997) noted that the MBTI was the most pos- 
itively regarded intervention activity in her work with 
midlife women. 


. What factors should 1 consider in timing the 


administration? 

Any client in crisis needs to have that crisis dealt with 
before career counseling interventions are appropri- 
ate, and the career counselor may or may not have the 
skill set to handle those situations. Hammer and 
Kummerow (1996) present a model of appropriate 
strategies to use with clients based in part on how 
well clients know themselves and how clearly their 
vocational interest pattern is formed. For those 
clients who lack self-awareness and a stable sense of 
identity and who seem unable to differentiate their 
interests, therapeutic interventions may be more ap- 
propriate than focusing on any career search activi- 
ties. Those with a clear sense of self but an unfocused 
interest pattern may need to explore work activities, 
jobs, and work environments. Those with a differenti- 
ated interest pattern but who are unsure of them- 
selves may need short-term support and counseling. 
This may be the case, for example, immediately fol- 
lowing the loss of one’s job. Hammer and Kummerow 
(1996) suggest that it is with those who have a sense 
of identity and some knowledge of their interests that 
career counseling is suitable. It is at this point that 
administering the MBTI is most appropriate. 


. Which form should I use? 


Either Form M or Form K is appropriate, depending 
on which *level ol interpretation" one desires. Form 
K provides the MBTI Step I], which allows for addi- 
tion of a more “behavioral” interpretation. For those 
with the required clinical training, Form J may be 
used; it adds Comfort/Discomfort scales. 


. Are there any particular cautions in administering 


the MBTI? 

The frame of reference for those taking the MBTI is an 
important one. In thinking about their careers, some 
people wonder if it might be hest to respond to the 
MBTI with their work lives in mind. The answer is 
unequivocally no. ll we are attempting to help people 
find the roles or situations where they are most likely 


Uses of Iype in Career Counseling 323 





to work well, then we must concentrate on who they 
are, not on what they do. 1t is when people are work- 
ing with their natural prelerences that they are most 
likely expending the least amount ol energy to do the 
tasks and gaining the most energy from their activi- 
ties. This does not take away from the reality that 
people can and do flex with the situations but rather 
recognizes that each person has a more natural pref- 
erence in every situation. 


. What effect does a work frame of reference seem to 


have on “best-fit” type? 

Several studies have looked at the effects of work on 

type verification. Kummerow (1988) asked retail 

store managers who were participants in management 
development classes to sel-assess and to assess their 
types in work situations (that is, how they were actu- 
ally doing their work) as well as to verify the type that 
fit them best overall. She found that the work situa- 
tions type fit least well in matching the verified type; 

57.596 of the sample had identical types between their 

work situations and verified types. Apparently a num- 

ber of people were using preferences other than their 
most natural ones at work. 

In a study (Hammer, personal communication) of 
nearly 1,000 people, about 29% verified a type differ- 
ent from how they came out on the Indicator itself. 
The sample was made up of those training to use the 
MBTI professionally, so they were highly attuned to 
the importance of type verification. Participants who 
verified a type different from what they reported on 
the Indicator were asked to indicate which of nine 
possible reasons affected their results; respondents 
could choose as many reasons as were applicable. 
Several work-related reasons were included. These 
are listed below along with the percentage of those 
choosing this as an influence on their Indicator 
results: 

e 32.5%: “Aspects of your work that do not ‘match’ 
your preferences but which you have mastered, 
e.g., Introverts who work as trainers may learn and 
have to use some Extraverted skills to get their job 
done.” 

e. 22.7%: “Pressures from the culture of the organiza- 
tion in which you work, e.g., Perceivers may feel 
they ‘should’ be more planned, systematic, and 
organized than they prefer to be, and may strive to 
behave in that way.” 

* Among the nine possible reasons, the one indi- 
cated the most was the one pertaining to "aspects 
of work." 

Thus the research suggests that work may inlluence 

the results on the MBTI but also that interpreters can 

use that information from the work setting to help 
verify the best-fit type. 


3 


24 


The Uses of Type 


6. How do I help my clients determine their “best- fit” 
preferences? 
Practitioners can help clients understand influences of 
work, comprehend the use of all the functions at work, 
and find a type that best fits the person. A request for 
information from the client such as *Describe how you 
use both your Thinking and your Feeling in your 
work" may elicit a great deal of information, including 
which function is preferred as well as a reminder that 
the client does use both. The client may speak of one 
function being easier to access than thc other, of one 
requiring more (or less) energy, ol one being liked 
more than the other, etc. Through using good counsel- 
ing skills, counselors can help the client understand 
what they are saying about the functions and what that 
means. It is essential in career counseling that practi- 
tioners and clients work with verified typc. That will 
give the most comprehensive picture of clients and the 
kind of work activities from which they are most likely 
to draw energy and gain satisfaction. 

7. What uses of type in career counseling should be 
avoided? 
Any approach that stereotypes the person or the 
occupation is inappropriate. Remember that each 
person has access to all eight preference domains and 
that many occupations also require the use of all eight 
at least some of the time. Using the MBTI to provide 
the definitive yes or no to a career search would also 
be inappropriate since so many factors go into career 
choice besides personality. 


Conclusion 


The knowledge of type enhances our understanding of 
clients' preferred work environments, occupational choices, 
interests, values, satisfactions, self-efficacy, and development. 


By itself, cach area is useful in career counseling, but with 
the addition of type each becomes even more meaningful. 
Career development and career counseling are complex 
areas, as is type. 

Several type-related patterns in this chapter include the 
following: 


m The work environment appears to be more of a focus for 
the Extraverted types than the Introverted ones. 

B In occupational selection, the function pairs (ST, SE NE 
NT) play the largest role in shaping the occupational 
pattern. 

B [n work satisfaction, the attitude pairs (EJ, EP IP, and IJ) 
play the greatest roles, with the EJs the most satisfied 
and IPs often the least. 

m Values appear somewhat shaped by the differences in 
Thinking-Feeling, with Feeling types identifying more 
values of importance to them than Thinking types. 
Extraverted types also identify more values as important 
than Introverted types. 

€ Different types have distinctly different interest patterns 
from one another. Among the patterns are the NF focus 
on self-expression and NT focus on abstract problem 
solving. 

m High self-efficacy or confidence in many areas and its 
link to high interests in those areas describe ENTs. 

W Career decisiveness is related to Judging. 


That the MBTI personality inventory is useful in helping 
people find meaningful work where they can be productive 
has been amply illustrated here. Through using type in all 
its levels (static, dynamic, developmental, and behavioral) 
career counselors can help clients explore the external 
world of work and the internal world of the individual. 
Through understanding the contributions of type (and its 
limitations) practitioners can continue to ensure its wise 
use and help clients use it to make the transition into the 
new world of work. 


Uses of Type in Organizations | 3 


Contributed by Linda K. Kirby, Nancy J. Barger, and Roger R. Pearman 


Introducing the MBTI and 
Psychological Type in Organizations 


Introducing and Using the Dynamic 
and Developmental Aspects of Type 


Improving Communication 
Dealing with Conflict 


Enhancing Problem Solving 
and Decision Making 


Planning, Implementing, and 
Managing Organizational Change 


Recognizing and Managing Stress 
Using the MBTI with Teams 


Using the MBTI in Leadership 
Development and Coaching 


Using Type in Analyzing 
Organizations 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Organizations 


Conclusion 


he primary goal of organizational development 
today is to create an effective organization that 
responds quickly and appropriately to changes in the com- 
petitive global environment. Research (Denison &amp; Mishra, 
1995) and experience demonstrate that the following are 


crucial components of effective organizations: 


Employee iniuative, flexibility, and accountability 
B Inclusion of employees in decision making 

B A clear sense of organizational and group mission 
B Flat and fluid hierarchies 

8 Flexible and responsive leadership 


As this awareness has developed, employee and leader 
development programs have grown exponentially to try to 
transform organizations and the ways people work. 

As investment in employee development and training has 
grown, so has use of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator person- 
ality inventory, currently exceeding 860,000 administrations 
per year in organizational settings. Some of this use is for 
individual career development, but the MBTI is also used as 
a basic tool in a wide variety of development and training 
programs focused on organizational effectiveness. 

This more general use of the MBTI as a tool in seemingly 
unrelated training programs has developed because MBTI 
results, presented within the context of Jungian psychologi- 
cal type theory, have wide applicability to workstyles and 


325 


326 ~The Uses of Type 





interactions. A number of qualities account for the MBTI's 
usefulness as a basic tool in employee development: 


Ææ MBTI results and interpretation focus on how people 
take in information (perception) and how they prioritize 
that information to make decisions (judgment)— basic 
personality facets that underlie most work tasks and 





training. 

Bg MBTI type enhances peoples clarity and comfort with 
their own workstyles while constructively identifying 
possible blind spots and areas of vulnerability. 

B Type theory and the MBTI give a logical, coherent struc- 
ture for understanding normal differences among people 
in a host of other work-related activities: communication 
styles, teamwork, project management, time manage- 
ment, preferred supervision style and work environment, 
responses and needs during organizational change, pre- 
ferred learning styles, and many more. 

B Type theory presents a dynamic picture of individual 
functioning, including recognition of the dominant 
function as the basis of motivation and identification of 
customary responses to stress. 

B Type theory outlines a model of lifelong individual 
development, and the MBTI identifies likely paths for 
development, useful with work groups and in coaching 
individual leaders and managers. 

g The MBTI provides a perspective and data for analyzing 
organizational culture, management structures, and 
other organizational svstems. 

B The MBTI! and supporting type resources demonstrate the 
value added by diversity within the organization or work 
group. This ethic—the constructive use of differences— 
is particularly applicable in today’s global and diverse 
organizations. 


These powerful potentials of the MBTI and psychologi- 
cal type result when practitioners administer the instru- 
ment appropriately, interpret results correctly, lead clients 
through a process of verifying their type, and add the depth 
inherent in the dynamic Jungian theory of personality. The 
theory and construction sections of this manual equip prae- 
litioners with the theoretical framework and knowledge of 
the instrument needed for such in-depth use of type. 

The goal of this chapter is to provide specific, practical 
applications for effective use of the MBTI assessment tool 
in organizations: to outline and illustrate common organi- 
zational uses of the MBTI, suggest appropriate resources, 
and refer to related research of particular interest to practi- 
tioners. When appropriate, the topical sections include 
considerations related to working with individuals in 
coaching and development, training with intact work 
groups, and locusing at the organizational level. Addi- 
tional sections focus specifically on using the MBTI with 
teams and in leadership development programs, applica- 
tions that draw on the uses already described but have spe- 
cial importance in today's organization development work. 
Though use of the MBTI in career development courses 





and counscling in organizations is widespread and signif- 
cant, this chapter will not directly address this topic; Chap- 
ter I2 of this manual is a thorough treatment of inlorma- 
tion, applications, and rescarch in using the MBTI for career 
development. 

Because the components of human personality indicated 
by the MBTI underlie so much of human activity, the 
approaches, exercises, and research suggested in one sec- 
tion are often useful in a slighily modified form for other 
purposes. 

The chapter concludes with a section on administering 
and interpreting the MBTI in organizations, including sug- 
gestions for dealing with common problems that arise in 
applying the ethical guidelines in organizational settings. 


Introducing the MBTI and 
Psychological Type in Organizations 


Gaining acceptance of the MBTI as an organizational tool is 
easiest when practitioners can present an introductory 
workshop. However, some organizations require a proposal 
outlining anticipated use of the MBTI. This section dis- 
cusses both ways of introducing type into the organization. 


Preparing and Presenting MBTI Proposals 


Practitioners can begin with hypotheses based on research 
about type distributions of managers and leaders in organi- 
zations. Tables 13.1, 13.2, and 13.3 illustrate patterns of 
types found in leadership positions in organizations and 
typical type distributions among people who work in 
human resources and consulting. 

Type tables of large groups of managers and leaders from 
a wide variety of cultures demonstrate an overrepresenta- 
tion of Thinking and Judging, compared to general popula- 
tions (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 1997b). The pattern of TJ man- 
agers and leaders is true even in organizations whose goals 
or work would seem to appeal to people of other types 
(Craig, Craig, &amp; Sleight, 1988; Hawkins, Williams, &amp; 
Hawkins, 1990). For example, teaching in elementary 
schools (children 6 to I2 years) seems to attract an overrep- 
resentation of people preferring Feeling compared to the 
general population (DiTiberio, 1996), but type tables of 
principals of those schools show the same TJ pattern as for 
leaders in other organizations (Macdaid et al., 1986). 

Type tables of human resource professionals tend to 
show higher percentages ol Intuition, Feeling, and Perceiv- 
ing types than appear in type tables of management groups. 
Types of consultants tend to concentrate in the lower right- 
hand quadrant of the type table, the four EN types. Practi- 
tioners can hypothesize that their own most natural style of 
gathering information, organizing it, and delivering propos- 
als will need to be modified to speak effectively to organiza- 
tional leaders and decision makers. 


Table 13.1 





Uses of Type in Organizations 327 


Type Distribution of Participants in the Center for Creative Leadership's 
Leadership Development Program in Percentages 


52.576 
47 5% 
49.7% 
50.3% 
79.6% 
20.4% 
68.9% 
31.1% 


57.876 
21.876 
| 1.076 

9.376 


41.176 
38.576 
11.7% 

8.6% 


28.6% 
25.9% 
23.8% 
21.6% 


29.1% 
21.3% 
[2.5% 
[2.2% 
10.4% 
6.2% 
4.6% 
3.6% 





Note: N = 26,477. 


Source: From “The Relationship Between the MBTI and Measures of Personality and Performance in Management Groups,” by J W Fleenor, 
1997, m Developing Leaders, p 119 Palo Alto, CA. Davies-Black. Copyright 1997 by Davies-Black Used with permission. 


Using Type Knowledge 


Knowing the specific types of decision makers is not neces- 
sary. Instead, practitioners can use their knowledge of the 
basic needs associated with each type dichotomy to ensure 
that proposals address the primary concerns of decision 
makers: 


m E-I: Include time for questions and discussions (E) and 
written information provided ahead of time (1). 

B S-N: Include the specifics (who, when, what, how, and 
how much) along with examples of the MBTTs use in 
other similar organizations (S) and the future vision of 
how it connects to current problems and could trans- 
form the organization (N). 

m I-F: Include the logical, objective rationale and cost- 
benefit analysis (T) and the ways in which the MBTI con- 
nects to the mission and values of the organization (F). 

m J-P: Include suggested structures, plans, and time 
frames (J) and planned flexibility for midcourse changes 
as new information comes in or the needs change (P). 


Using a type perspective also ensures that practitioners 
have covered the bases in developing their proposal. 


Resources 


Practitioners can draw on two resources in developing and 
presenting their proposals: Using the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator in Organizations (Hirsh, 1990) and Type and Change: 
MBTI Leaders Guide (Barger &amp; Kirby, 19972). The first pro- 
vides a wealth of information about specific uses to illustrate 
the MBTTs applicability to organizational issues, including 
lists of benefits of the MBTI to the organization. The second 
includes a section, “Designing and Presenting a Training Pro- 
posal," that focuses on using the MBTI to deal with organiza- 
tional change, but the process and perspectives discussed 
apply to presenting the MBTI for other purposes as well. 


Introductory Workshops in Organizations 


The most effective way to gain acceptance of the MBTI as a 
tool in organization development is the following: 


m Present an introduction to type workshop. 

B Return results. 

W Verify type. 

m Demonstrate applications that add value for the clients 
while also illustrating the usefulness of the MBTI. 


328 The Uses of Type 








Table 13.2 Type Distribution of Human Resources Personnel 





58.68% 
41.32% 
38.42% 
61.58% 
60.79% 
39.21% 
61.32% 
38.68% 


25.00% 
16.32% 
22.37% 
36.32% 


25.00% 
13.42% 
25.79% 
35.79% 


31.58% 

6.84% 
31.84% 
29.74% 


41.84% 
18.95% 
19.74% 
19.47% 


IN 24.7476 
EN 36.84% 
IS 16.5875 
ES 21.84% 


ET 33.16% 
EG 25.53% 
IF 13.68% 
IT 27.63% 


Sidom 18.16% 
Naom 29.21% 
Tdom 32-11 26 
Fáom 20.53% 


ENT) 


11.32% 


Note: N = 380. 
Soure. Data trom CAPT databank, April 1998 


The last section of this chapter outlines a group intro- 
duction to type and includes resources for practitioners to 
use during group introductions. It is important for practi- 
tioners to allow time to complete all the listed compo- 
nents, including time for verification of best-fit type, for 
rcading full type descriptions, and lor applying type to 
work issues. 


Making Type Results Real Applying MBTI information to 
deal with client issues is the last component of an intro- 
ductory workshop. This step is crucial: Recciving individual 
MBTI results can be personally illuminating and aflirming 
but demonstrating the Indicators use as a tool for solving 
client problems solidifies clients’ understanding of type and 
helps them begin the process ol integrating this perspective 
into their daily work lives. 


Fach section in this chapter discusses specific applications 
to respond to identified client needs. In some organizational 
situations, the introductory session is for groups of people 
who do not work together and have not identified common 
issues. The following are activities that can be used in such 
settings to reinforce participants’ understanding of type and 
demonstrate how they can apply that understanding to 
enhance their work lives. The activities are listed in order of 
the time required, with the briefest applications first and 
those taking the most time last: 


B Ask individuals to pair up with a "talking partner” and 
take turns telling each other what fits or docs not fit in 
their full type description. 

g Form groups of like types (using whole type or domi- 
nant functions; sce Table 3.3) and ask them to gencrate 


Table 13.3 
IST] ISF) INF} 
10.00% 2.67% 
ISTP ISFP 
2.67% 0.67% 
ESTP ESFP 
3.33% 1.33% 
ESTJ ESF} 
9.33% 3.33% 


Note: N = 150: 
Source: Data from CAPT databank, Apnl 1998 


examples of how they see their type helping them in 
their work. 

Form groups of like types and ask them to respond briefly 
to a series of questions about what kinds of information 
they prefer (S or N), their priorities in making decisions 
(T or F), their preferences in structuring work tasks (J or 
P), and when and how they extravert and introvert. 

Form groups of like types and ask them to design together 
their ideal work environment, with as much detail as pos- 
sible. Providing a variety of materials—paper, markers, 
pictures, advertisements, crafts. components—allows 
groups to create interesting and instructive “pictures.” 





Customizing Introductory Workshops Just as proposals 


need to take account of type differences, so do introductory 


type workshops—and all other organizational training. The 


8.00% 


INFP 


6.67% 


ENFP 


8.67% 


ENF] 


6.67% 


Uses ol Type in Organizations 329 


Type Distribution of Management Analysts and Consultants 


E 58.00% 
l 42.00% 
ili S 33.33€, 
. N 66.67% 
5.3376 T 62.00% 
F 38.00% 
58.67% 
Te P 41.33% 
Jj 26.00% 
6.00% IP 16.00% 
EP 25.33% 
EJ 32.67% 
ENTP ST 25.33% 
SF 8.00% 
a NF 30.002; 
EE NT 36.67% 
SJ 25.33% 
SP 8.00% 
ENT) NP 33.33% 
NJ 33.33% 
13.33% 
TJ 38.00% 
TP 24.00% 
FP 17.33% 
FJ 20.679; 
IN 26.00% 
EN 40.67% 
IS 16.00% 
ES 17.33% 
ET 38.00% 
EF 20.00% 
IF 18.00% 
IT 24.00% 
Sim | 7.3 3% 
Nom 34.00% 
pe 31.33% 
Eom ! 7.3396 


research, analysis, and information provided in Chapter 11 ol 
this manual provide what practitioners need to ensure that all 
of their training is sensitive to type differences in learning 
styles and will speak effectively to different people. It is par- 
ticularly important for practitioners to become aware of their 
own teaching/lcarning style and ways to modify that style to 
communicate effectively with people of different types. 
Introductory type workshops will also have greater 
impact when practitioners customize their presentation 
content, style, and examples to make them clearly relevant 
to the people and the work of the specific organization. 
Hahn-Rollins and Mongeon (1988) described an interest- 
ing and instruetive experience presenting type to Forcign 
Service officers. They indicated the problems presented by 
the culture of the group and organization, and reported 
modifications they made to provide a better fit with the 


330 The Uses of Type 


organizational culture. Their process provides a model for 
taking specific organizational cultures into account in intro- 
ductory sessions. 


Resources The recommended resource for introductory 
type workshops is Introduction to Type (Myers, with Kirby &amp; 
Myers, 1998) for each participant. It presents all the infor- 
mation practitioners need to include in the session, provides 


a structure for participant type verification, describes each of 


the 16 types in full, outlines several type applications, and 
gives important guidelines for using type and avoiding 
misuses. Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; 
Kummerow, 1998) presents basic type information specif- 
ically relevant to organizations. Using the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator in Organizations (Hirsh, 1990) provides repro- 
ducible masters for overhead presentations in introductory 
workshops. “Valuing Preferences in the Workplace” (Brock &amp; 
Kummerow, n.d.) is a handout for participants in intro- 
ductory workshops and includes a “leader’s guide” with 
suggestions for use in organizations. 


Research for Practitioners Research from the national 


sample and reports from organization development 
specialists (Hirsh, 19922) indicate that peoples descriptions 
of ideal work environments illustrate all the dichotomies 
identified by the MBTI. This makes the last activity 
suggested—designing an ideal work environment—an 
effective way to clarify and apply type with an introductory 
group. 

Table 12.5 in Chapter 12, page 289, presents relation- 
ships between MBTI preferences on Form M and subscales 
on the Work Environment Scale (WES) for a group of uni- 
versity employees. Tables 12.6, 12.7, and 12.8 (on pages 
289, 290, and 291, respectively) present research on the 
preferred work environments identified by whole types in 
the national sample of adults gathered by Consulting Psy- 
chologists Press in its development and testing of Form M 
items. (See Chapter 7, pages 156-157, and the Appendix 
for descriptions of this sample and the research). 

Practitioners can use this rescarch information to struc- 
ture and inform their debriefing of the exercise on ideal 
work environments, allowing them to highlight typical 
MBTI-related components in the presentations of different 
type groups. 





Summary 


Introducing psychological type and the MBTI into organi- 
zations can be exciting and rewarding for practitioners, 
clients, and the organization. Type theory is positive and 
supportive, the examples and type descriptions fit people, 
and the possibilities for application and integration into 
daily life are almost limitless (Brock, 1996). Introducing the 
MBTI well supports individual workstyles and needs and 
encourages employee self-confidence, development, flexi- 
bility, and autonomy. 


On the other hand, if type is introduced briefly and per- 
functorily, clients “forget their letters” and don't make use 
of type knowledge; or when they do use it, they tend to 
stereotype and label others. An unbiased introduction, with 
attention to type verification and to the full type descrip- 
tions, and some opportunities to apply the information to 
specific day-to-day work settings provide the best guarantee 
that clients and the organization will profit from the bene- 
fits and avoid the potential pitfalls. 


Introducing and Using the Dynamic 
and Developmental Aspects of Type 


Carl G. Jungs theory of personality is dynamic and develop- 
mental. The preferences do not exist in isolation but instead 
interact with each other to form distinctive personality pat- 
terns. The resulting psychological types are not static boxes 
into which people fit—they evolve and become more effec- 
tive as people learn and develop. Myers and Briggs opera- 
tionalized Jungs dynamic model in the MBTI, and the influ- 
ence of each preference on the others underlies the type 
descriptions in Introduction to Type (Myers, with Kirby &amp; 
Myers, 1998). 

The dynamic and developmental components of Jungs 
theory offer some of the most powerful applications of the 
MBTI, but this potential is often underused in organiza- 
tions. Placing type within this Jungian framework also leads 
clients away from stereotyping and from feeling stereotyped 
or "boxed in." 

Using this deeper interpretive level in conjunction with 
the MBTI expands its usefulness, providing the basis for the 
following applications: 


E || gives people information about how others experience 
them by pointing to the function each type uses when 
interacting with the external world. This clarifies com- 
munication styles (Yeakley, 1982, 1983) and is especially 
helpful for those who prefer Introversion. 

W It highlights the role of the dominant tunction—a cen- 
tral part of individual identity. Research (Hammer, 19962) 
and practice (Barger &amp; Kirby, 1995a; Kummerow, Barger, 
&amp; Kirby, 1997) indicate that identifying a types domi- 
nant function illuminates core values and motivations 
(for example, sec this chapters section on dealing with 
organizational change). 

B [i creates awareness of the need for the balance poten- 
tially provided by a persons auxiliary function—balance 
between perception and judgment and between extravert- 
ing and introverting. 





B |t provides a framework for recognizing type-consistent 


reactions to everyday stress and consistent but out-of- 
character reactions to excessive stress. 


B |t leads people to explore the impacts of midlife develop- 


mental periods. 





m it includes a model of lifelong development that can 
guide self-assessment and identification of developmen- 
tal goals. 


Like MBTI type, these dynamic and developmental per- 
spectives identily areas for individual growth and improvc- 
ment of interactions among people in a nonjudgmental way. 


Presenting Type Dynamics and Development 
in an Organizational Setting 


Every introduction to the MBTI and type needs to include 
statements about the dynamic nature of type theory: that a 
psychological type is much more than the adding together 
of four separate preferences and that cach type is a unique 
combination based on the interactions of the preferences 
within that type. It is also helpful to state that the prefer- 
ences indicated by the MBTI are underlying patterns whose 
expression and development are influenced by a host of 
environmental factors such as parents and family, educa- 
tion, cultural values, religion, individual life experiences, 
profession, and so on. 

Practitioners can deepen their own understanding of 
type dynamics and development through reading ( Chapters 
3 and 4 of this manual; Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994) and observa- 
tion. Though type tables such as the one in Chapter 3, page 
31, provide a quick guide to each types dynamics, practition- 
ers will fec} most comfortahle—and will be most effective— 
when they understand the theory underlying dynamics and 
can give examples from their own experience. 

Clients typically can understand and make use of type 
dynamics and development with a relatively brief explana- 
tion. This explanation can be integrated into a standard 
"introduction to type" session or presented in a follow-up 
session. 


Integrating Dynamics into the Introduction to Type 
Practitioners who include the dynamic picture of type in 
introductory sessions typically do this by presenting the 
following points: 


m In MBTI theory, each type has a favorite mental process, 
called the dominant function. It forms the core identity 
and direction for the overall personality. In Gifts Differ- 
ing Isabel Myers called it “the general” (Myers with 
Myers, 1980/1995). Your dominant function will be one 
of the two middle letters in your four-letter type. 

g That favorite mental process is normally used in your 
favorite world: the outer world for those who prefer Extra- 
version, the inner world for those who prefer Introversion. 
Myers said the extraverted dominant function is like the 
general who goes out into the field, overseeing and direct- 
ing everyone. The introverted dominant function is like a 
general who stays inside the tent, sending out orders. 

g When we talk about types in this way, we use terms such 
as an Extraverted Intuitive type, meaning a type that 
extraverts its dominant function of Intuition. 





Uses of Type in Organizations 331 


m The other middle letter of the type is called the auxiliary 
function. It assists the dominant function (Myers 
likened it to the generals aide-de-camp) by providing 
balance between perception and judgment and between 
extraverting and introverting. So if your dominant func- 
tion is one of the perceiving functions (S or N), your 
auxiliary function will be T or E whichever you preter. 
This gives people a comfortable way of taking in infor- 
mation and making decisions. And if you prefer Intro- 
version and therefore use your dominant function 
inside, we would expect you to use your auxiliary helper 
to deal with the outside world—it’s what you normally 
extravert. This gives people comfortable ways of ex- 
traverting and introverting. 


The practitioner then focuses on the four-letter type 
indicated by MBTI results, pointing out that the four letters 
identify 16 different underlying patterns of perceiving, 
judging, and directing energy: 


Introducing Dynamics and Development in Follow-Up 
Sessions As mentioned above, even when dynamics will 


not be directly addressed and described in the introductory 
session, it is important to include the dynamic context for 
understanding MBTI results. Then, at a follow-up session, 
practitioners can refer back to those statements and remind 
clients that S and N are two different ways of perceiving, T 
and F two opposite ways of judging. They can then explain 
dynamics quickly, using the discussion of dynamics in 
Introduction to Type (Myers, with Kirby &amp; Myers, 1998) and 
making points similar to those listed above. 


Using Type Descriptions to Illustrate Dynamics 


Whichever way dynamics are introduced, the type descrip- 
tions in Introduction to Type provide a practical way to illus- 
trate dynamics. Practitioners can use one type description 
to illustrate how the dynamics play out in a type, or each 
participant can look at his or her own type description 
while the professional makes the following points: 

First, notice the title of the page: It gives the dominant 
function in its preferred attitude and then the auxiliary 
function in its preferred attitude. For example, the tide of 
the first type description is ISTJ—Introverted Sensing with 
Extraverted Thinking. 

Sccond, notice the “Characteristics” section: The first 
paragraph defines the dominant function and indicates 
whether it is normally used inside or is extraverted. The 
second paragraph describes the auxiliary function in its 
customary attitude. 

Third, the section on “How Others May See Them" cap- 
tures what this type extraverts (and therefore what others 
see) and what this type introverts. 

The final section of the type descriptions, “Potential 
Areas for Growth,” outlines developmental patterns: what 
can happen if the dominant and auxiliary functions are not 


See, The Uses of Type 


developed and used well, what happens to types under 
stress, indications of lack of development and use of the 
nonpreferred funetions, and common examples of erup- 
tions of the inferior funetion. 


Applying Type Dynamics and Development 


To assist clients in using this information to deepen self- 
understanding and their understanding of colleagues, prac- 
titioners can form dominant-alike groups (types who usc 
the same dominant function in the same attitude) and ask 
them to discuss questions such as the following: 


g What do you extravert? How do you experience that? 
How do others? What do you introvert? How do you 
experience that? How do others? 

m How does your dominant function find support in your 
work? How does your auxiliary function provide balance? 

m Looking at yourself in childhood, can you see examples 
of your use and development of the dominant function? 


The remaining sections on organizational applications 
frequently draw on this deeper level of type understanding, 
and the suggestions for activities there can also be used to 
illustrate dynamics. 


Resources 


As indicated above, the brief description of type dynamics 
in Introduction to Type, along with analysis of the type 
description, is enough for clients to begin to use dynamics. 
If dynamics are introduced in a follow-up session, thisisa 
good time to use Introduction to Tvpe in Organizations (Hirsh 
&amp; Kummerow, 1998). This booklet provides a review of the 
basie dichotomies with word lists and includes à section on 
type dynamics as well as other organizational applications 
that will be mentioned later in this chapter. 

For practitioners and for clients who want to explore 
further, Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development 
(Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994) gives a deeper explanation of those 
topies, suggests typical interactions of dominant and auxil- 
iary functions, defines the differences when functions are 
extraverted and introverted, and gives examples of using 
dynamics to understand work interactions. The second half 
of the booklet outlines Jungs developmental model, dis- 
cusses typical problems or issues that arise for people, 
explores midlife development, and offers suggestions of 
ways people can experience preferences that they normally 
do not use. 


Research for Practitioners 


Chapter 4 of this manual presents a varicty of research stud- 
ies based on type dynamics. Tables 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, and 4.11, 
for example, summarize research by the first and last letters 
of types: IJ, IP, EP, and EJ. Commonalities among these 
four types that appear in the rows of the type table relate 
to the dichotomy (S-N or T-F) that they extravert and the 





dichotomy that they introvert. For example, the IJ types are 
the four types who extravert their auxiliary judging function 
and introvert their dominant perceiving function, and so on. 

All research that looks at whole types, as opposed to 
preferences or preference combinations, also provides 
information about the dynamic interactions within that 
type. Such research is summarized in Chapter 4, Tables 
4.26—4.41, and in Chapter 9. 

Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development (Myers &amp; 
Kirby, 1994) presents information about the eight dominant 
functions, including differences related to the auxiliary 
function. It is based on collections of information from 
types in workshops. This information is briefly summarized 
in Table lp F. 

Reading this research and using the findings to observe 
types will assist practitioners in deepening their understand- 
ing of dynamies and in developing examples. 


Summary 


Organizational clients find the dynamic and developmental 
framework of type illuminates their own functioning and 
deepens their understanding of others. Even when dynam- 
ics and development are not explicitly introduced to clients, 
practitioners can use this perspective to expand their own 
understanding and develop wider and deeper applications 
of type to work issues. 


Improving Communication 


One of the most frequent organizational applications of psy- 
chological type comes in response to client requests to “help 
us communicate better” (Sample &amp; Hoffman, 1986). MBTI 
type includes information about the preferred communica- 
tion styles of each type and areas of frequent misunder- 
standing between people of different types. As in the other 
applications areas, the MBTI both affirms an individual's 
natural style and identifies ways he or she can modify that 
style to be more effective. 

Following an introduction to type session, clients are 
able to describe their communication styles and needs in 
terms of the MBTI preferences. Practitioners can direct 
clients to *choose one of the preferences about which you 
feel clear—you recognize this in yourself.” Then, forming 
preference groups based on their choices, the professional 
can ask the groups, “When someone is trying to communi- 
cate something to you, what does this preference—this 
part of you—want in order to understand and accept the 
communication?" 

To learn more about the kinds of information practition- 
ers can expect, see the "Resources" section that lollows. 
These resources identify work compiled by a number of 
type prolessionals that is categorized by preference, prefer- 
ence combinations, and four-letter type. 


Table 13.4 The Dominant Function of Each Type 


IST) ISFJ 


Respecting and relying on 
internally stored data about 
reality and actual events 


Respecting and relying on 
internally stored data about 
people who are important 
to them 


ISTP ISFP 


Living by strong inner values 
about honoring people and 
nature 


Logically organizing vast 
amounts of specific data about 
the material world 


ESTP ESFP 


Delighting in the stimulation 
of interacting with people, 
embracing the variety of 
sensing experience 


Delighting in the endless 
variety of the world and in 
spontaneously interacting with it 


ESTJ ESFJ 


Acting decisively to create 

an environment that cares for 
the practical needs of people 
around them 


Decisively, logically, and 
efficiently structuring the 
external environment to 
achieve specific goals 


INFJ 


Relying on clear insights about 
people and complex pictures 
of the future 


INFP 


Filtering everything through 
a coherent core of personal 
values based on honoring 
individuals 


ENFP 


Seeing exciting possibilities for 
people and pursuing them with 
energy and enthusiasm 


ENFJ 


Providing the structures and 
encouragement to motivate 
and energize people to grow 





Uses ol Type in Organizations 


333 


INTJ 


Relying on clear, complex 
inner pictures of the present 
and future 


INTP 


Logically organizing complex 
information into global 
systems to understand 

the world 


ENTP 


Scanning the environment for 
options, new and stimulating 
ideas, exciting possibilities 


ENT) 


Directing others decisively, 
structuring the environment 
to achieve long-term goals 


Source: From Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development, pp. 8-9, by K. D Myers and L. K. Kirby, 1994. Palo Alto, CA. Consulung Psychologists Press Copyright 1994 by 


Consulting Psychologists Press. Used with permission. 


Using This Information 


A training session addressing type and communication with 
people who don't work together can provide individuals in 
the group with valuable information about why others may 
misunderstand their communication as well as suggest 
ways to modify their style. An ENFP, for example, may rec- 
ognize during the session that co-workers who prefer Sens- 
ing have a difficult time "seeing" their vision when the 
ENFP presents it in enthusiastic, big-picture terms. The 
ENFP can then ask for assistance from someone in the 
group with a Sensing preference to learn how to present 
exciting possibilities in ways that will communicate more 
effectively with people of different types. 

When the group that has generated these communica- 
tion needs consists of people who work with each other, the 
information can form the basis for working agreements. See 
the section "Using Type with Teams" in this chapter for 
additional suggestions on ncgotiating working agreements. 
Collections of such information from employees can also 
serve a valuable function in management and leadership 
training or coaching. See the section “Using Type in Coach- 
ing Leaders" in this chapter for suggestions. 

At the organizational level, understanding peoples dif- 
ferent communication needs can provide a structure for 
analyzing and modifying a company’s style of communicat- 
ing with employees and/or with clients. An organization 


may recognize, for example, that its normal communication 
style emphasizes the following: 


B Introversion 


Information generally presented in writing 


Little opportunity for discussion except informally 


Information restricted 


m Intuition 





given on a "need-to-know" basis 


Information given in general concepts, the “big picture” 


Emphasis on the future vision 


Little specific direction of how people are to act on a 


day-to-day basis 
gm Thinking 


Information in the form of logical analysis 


Emphasis on the rationale 


Little mention of values or impacts on people 


m Judging 


Information generally presented after decisions have been 


made 


Emphasis on goals, plans, and structures 


Little room for flexibility and processing 


Once this is recognized, the organization can decide to 
broaden its systems to include methods that will commu- 
nicate more effectively to all employees. Organizations that 


334 The Uses of Type 


have analyzed their communication using type infonnation 
have developed some of the following ideas to add to the 
communication system already in place: 


@ Extraversion 
“Town meetings,” with time for questions and/or small 
group discussions 
Regular informal “brown bag” lunches for leaders and 
employees 
A variety of face-to-face give-and-take sessions—leaders 
attending team or department meetings, listening, ask- 
ing questions, responding 

m Sensing 
Relating current information to the past 


Fleshing out all vision/mission statements with the 
realities—what does this mean for the day-to-day work 


Giving the specifics of what is expected of employees 
m Feeling 

Inviting people to be involved and providing time/sup- 

port for involvement 


Stating the underlying values of policies 
Acknowledging the impact on employees and working 
with employees to respond to their concerns 

B Perceiving 
Communicating before final decisions are made, while 
theres time for process and change 


Building flexibility into plans and schedules 


Demonstrating openness to new information 


Practitioners can work with organizational leaders and 
those in charge of communications to create a type “filter,” 
a checklist to review all communications before they are 
sent out to ensure that the intended message is heard. 


Resources 


The type descriptions in Introduction to Type (Myers, with 
Kirby &amp; Myers, 1998) include a brief summary of cach 
types typical communication style in the section “How 
Others May Sce Them.” Introduction to Type in Organizations 
(Hirsh &amp; Kummerow, 1998) includes a chart of “Preferred 
Methods of Communication" related to each of the eight 
preferences. Talking in Type (Kummcerow, 1987) is a short 
handout describing the basic needs of each preference and 
how to adjust one’s conversational style to communicate 
more effectively. 

Additional information useful as background for practi- 
toners or for use with clients who wish to pursue this topic 
in depth may be found in the following: 

WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, &amp; Kirby, 1997), espe- 
cially Chapter 2, includes discussion of communication 
style by preference, with tips for communicating more 


effectively directed to those preferring Extraversion, those 
preferring Introversion, and so on. A valuable section on 
mutual misunderstandings examines typical communica- 
tion styles—and how others may misinterpret them by 
function pairs (ST, SE NE and NT)—and provides sugges- 
tions for modifying one’s natural styles to communicate 
more effectively. 

Using Ivpe in Sclling (Brock, 1994), while focused on that 
specific application, also includes suggestions for adjusting 
ones style to the “type modc" another person is using in 
order to communicate and persuade more effectively. 

Im Not Crazy, Um Just Not You (Pearman &amp; Albritton, 
1997) includes the following information about each four- 
letter type, collected from questionnaire responses from 48 
workshop groups: kinds of information that is attractive to 
this type; beliefs about communication; and ways this type 
usually expresses or presents itsell. For example, ISTJs are 
attracted to tested and verifiable data that can be analyzed 
easily; believe that precision in detail leads to clarity of 
thought; and generally present themselves in an unassum- 
ing manncer, preferring to convey information in a calm, 
careful way. 

Pearman and Albritton (1997) also include information 
by four-letter type about common prejudices or biases in 
relationship to information, about preconceptions used 
to evaluate information, and about what they call “hot 
buttons"—communication styles or content that produces 
an immediate, negative reaction. 


Research for Practitioners 


Research supports the usefulness of type in understanding 
communication patterns and misunderstandings. In two 
early studies, Yeakley (1982, 1983) found that people who 
use similar extraverting styles (for example, both extravert 
their Feeling judgment or both extravert their Intuition) 
report more satisfying and effective communication with 
each other than do those with differing extraverting styles. 
His conclusion provides a uselul summary for practitioners: 


People use all four of the communication styles—sensing, 
intuition, thinking, and feeling—but not with equal prefer- 
ence, skill, or effectiveness. Each of the 16 psychological types 
has à unique pattern... . Two people must use the same com- 
munication style at the same time in order to communicate 
effectively. This often requires some communication adjust- 
ment on the part of one or both ol the individuals involved. 
(1983, p. 5) 


Thorne (1987) found significant differences in the topics 
of discussion and the ability to reach common ground 
when types were similar and when they were different. Her- 
mon (1993) reported significant differences in preferred 
communication style by type preference based on research 
with 108 adults (primarily construction workers and tech- 
nicians). Table 13. 5 summarizes llermons statistically sig- 
nificant findings. 


« 


Uses of Type in Organizations 335 





Table 13.5 Communication Strategies and Needs: 


Significant Relationships with MBTI Preferences 


Extraversion 





Want to focus on a wide range of topics 


——————————— 








RSS a EEO 


Sensing 





Want practical, realistic messages 


Want well-thought-out, detailed plans 





eA ad DED Be Da. ID e EE uu 





Thinking 


Introversion 


Want to focus on one problem 


— — PA A tnt NN rt A 


Intuition 


Want imaginative, creative messages 


Feeling 





No significant relationships 





de nas hee! mana arte t &lt;= s €—— eet ~am æ 





Judging 


Want supervisor who “doesn't surprise them” 
Want detailed action plans "with time tables” 
Want focus on "completing planned projects" 


No significant relationships 





Perceiving 


Want supervisor who is "spontaneous" 
Want "spontaneous" and "flexible" plans 


Want projects to be flexible and open to modification 





Source. From "Communication Strategies of Psychological Type,” by M. V Hermon, 1993, in APT X Conference Proceedings, p. 92. Kansas City, MO, Association for Psychological 


Type Repnnted with permission. 


Brock (1995) presented a summary of communication 
style preferences based on information gathered from work- 
shop participants. It appears in Table 13.6. 


Dealing with Conflict 


Conflicts develop for a host of reasons unrelated to psycho- 
logical type: differences in culture, race, gender, and ethnic 
identification; differences in religion, social views, politics, 
personal commitments, and other important identifying 
values; differences in background, personal life events, edu- 
cation, and other shaping experiences; and competitive 
pressures within work. Because psychological type explains 
important differences in communication style, information 
gathering and giving, decision making, and structuring the 
environment, however, type-related differences often lead 
or contribute to normal conflicts between colleagues. Expe- 
rienced practitioners have found that MBTI type differences 
sometimes play a role in confliets that may seem to be about 
other things. In this case, untangling the type-related parts 
of the conflict and working to resolve them ean provide a 
cooperative base for moving ahead to deal with other, unre- 
lated issues. 

This section addresses integrating type with conllict res- 
olution models, common sources of conflict between peo- 
ple with opposite preferences, and using type to provide 
bridges for resolving conflicts that are not specifically about 


type differences. It concludes with suggested resources and 
references to research. 


Integrating Type with 
a Conflict Resolution Model 


Psychologists and sociologists have developed models that 
provide a structure for resolving conflicts (Kilmann &amp; 
Thomas, 1975). All of these models suggest ways to avoid 
or get beyond a win/lose approach to conflict, where one 
side is “right” and the other is clearly “wrong.” 

Practitioners use of any such models in resolving con- 
flicts will be strengthened by integrating type: 


m it identifies and affirms an individuals natural style of 
dealing with conflict. 

m Ít makes clear that others will have a very different style 
that is equally right for them. 

gm it supports modifying natural styles to interact more 
effectively. 


This ethic of the MBTI—the constructive use ol diller- 
ences— provides a framework and perspective for using any 
conflict resolution approach. 


Identifying Type-Related Conflicts 

The challenge lor practitioners is recognizing when con- 
flicts include type-related clements and then leading clients 
through a process of negotiating so that people get what is 


336 


Ihe Uses of Type 


Table 13.6 Behavioral Cues 
During Communication 


Talk It Out 
Extroverts 


Rapid speech 
Interrupt 
Louder volume to voice 


Ae € MÀ —À —À MÀ ——À =— - = 


Specifics 
Sensing Types 


Ask for step-by-step information 
or instruction 


Ask "what" and "how" 
questions 


Use precise descriptions 


Logical Implications 
Thinking Types 


Appear to be testing you or 
your knowledge 


Weigh the objective evidence 


Are unimpressed that others 
have decided in favor 


Conversations follow a pattern 
of checking logic: “if this, 
then that" 


Joy of Closure 
Judging Types 


Impatient with overly long 
descriptions, procedures 


The tone is "hurry up—l want 


to make this decision” ! 


May decide prematurely 
Enjoy closure 


Think It Through 
Introverts 


Pause in answering or giving 
information 


Quieter voice volume 
Shorter sentences, not run on 


EMEN = nee 


e pm emm cem mem mm m mem mon gen mte 


The Big Picture 
Intuitive Types 


Ask for the purpose of an 
action 


Look for possibilities 
Ask "why" questions 
Talk in general terms 


SE eC e an i aaa OS n teo 


Impact on People 
Feeling Types 


Strive for harmony in the 
interaction 


May talk about what they value 


Ask how others have acted or 
resolved the situation 


Matters to them whether 
others have been taken into 
account 


GEB Asiento "an R m Stm 


Joy of Processing 
Perceiving Types 


Seem to want "space" to make 
own decisions 


The tone is “let's explore,” what 
are some more factors to con- 
sider 


May decide at the last moment 
Enjoy processing 


PCODOMIIERIE E ZEND UE IESUNDUROUNET NIIS s NRI ONGNUTS EIN. CNN NN T SN n 
Source’ From Four Part Framework (Rev ed ), by $. A Brock, 1995, Minneapolis, 
MN Brock Associates Copyright 1987 by $. A. Brock. Adapted with permission. 


important to them in a conflict situation. The following are 
bricf descriptions of conflicts frequently experienced by co- 
workers who differ on a particular type dichotomy. These 
descriptions can be a beginning point for practitioners to 
sharpen their skills in identifying type-related components 
of conflicts. 


Extraversion-Introversion Conllicts here frequently relate 
to two areas: (1) quick versus more measured pacing and 
(2) breadth/changeability of topics versus focus. 

The natural pace ol those who prefer Extraversion is 
rapid. They develop their ideas by talking about them. As 


they talk, their thoughts become clearer to them; conse- 
quently they often change direction during the course of 
discussions. 

Those who prefer Introversion usually want to process 
internally and need some talk-free time and space to do so. 
The thinking-out-loud process of those preferring Extraver- 
sion can interfere with their thinking-inside process. Addi- 
tionally, when people preferring Introversion tune back into 
the conversation, they may find the discussion has shifted 
to a different topic. 

The opposites on this dichotomy often experience con- 
flict, with Extraverts labeling the Introverts as “withholding” 
or “not interested,” while Introverts experience Extraverts as 
“invasive.” And each may think the other is “avoiding the 
topic.” 


Sensing-Intuition Two conflicts that frequently develop 
related to differences in this dichotomy are (1) agreement 
on what the problem is and (2) a focus on experience versus 
a focus on theories. 

For Sensing types, the problem or conflict is defined hy 
what actually happened, usually concrete events: “John is 
late for our meetings 90% of the time.” Intuitive types are 
more likely to see specific behavior as part of a pattern that 
they think is the real problem: “John has difficulty dealing 
with authority figures." For Intuitive types, taking some 
action to ensure that John arrives on time to meetings doesnt 
deal with the “real” problem. For Sensing types, “difficulty 
with authority figures” has litthe meaning and no solution. 

When conflicts or problems arise, Sensing types tend to 
reflect on their experience and trust what they know has 
worked before in similar situations. Intuitive types are more 
likely to find theoretical explanations and solutions persua- 
sive: A new book or new interpretation seems more altrac- 
tive and more likely to achieve long-term results. 

Sensing types and Intuitive types sometimes end up in a 
conflict where each thinks the other "just doesnt get it” 
(the problem), with Sensing tvpes seeing Intuitive types as 
unrealistic or “off the wall” and Intuitive types seeing Sens- 
ing types as "shooting down" their ideas. 


Thinking-Feeling Two frequent conflicts related to this 
dichotomy are (1) searching for the “right” answer versus 
exploration of peoples ideas and (2) choosing the logical 
alternative and applying it to everyone versus finding indi- 
vidual solutions that work for people. 

Thinking types tend to believe that if a problem can be 
defined accurately and the relevant evidence gathered, there 
will be a correct solution, and thats what people should do. 
Feeling types are much more likely to think that “truth” is 
not cut and dried: Whats right for one may be wrong for 
another. The “solution” will be found by gathering many per- 
speetives and finding the answer that fits best for everyone. 

For Thinking types, the answer that is correct is gener- 
ally the one supported by logie and reason—the “objective” 
perspective, with personal considerations and emotions 


separated out. For Feeling types, personal considerations 
identify the solution: The best answer is found through 
empathizing with those involved and finding ways to sup- 
port them. 

Thinking types may experience the decision-making 
process of Feeling types as irrational, inconsistent, and 
illogical. Feeling types may experience the decision making 
of Thinking types as cold and uncaring. 


Judging-Perceiving Two of the normal conflicts related to 
this dichotomy are (1) the need for structure versus the need 
for flexibility and (2) the desire for closure versus the desire 
for openness (waiting). 

Judging types want clear goals; then they create plans, 
structures, and time frames to achieve them. Perceiving 
types typically want clear goals and a deadline; then they 
want to be trusted to meet them in their own ways. 

Judging types want decisions and closure. Ambiguity, 
delayed decisions, reopening decisions, and changing goals 
are extremely uncomfortable to them. Perceiving types, on 
the other hand, want decisions to grow out of the process. 
Making a decision because “its time,” or because the Judg- 
ing type wants one, often {cels forced, premature, and likely 
to be the wrong decision to Perceiving types. They have 
faith in their own internal sense of timing and trust that 
when the right time comes, they will know: “Now is the 
time; now I know what we should do.” 

Judging types often have trouble trusting that Perceiving 
types will come through in a timely way, that decisions will 
be made and action will be taken. Perceiving types often 
feel hemmed in, limited, and restricted by Judging types. 

These are not the only type-related confliets that practi- 
tioners may see in work settings, but they are some of the 
most common. As practitioners watch work interactions 
through a type lens, they will be able to identify such con- 
flicts more confidently. 


The Advantages of Recognizing Type in Conflicts The 
benefits of recognizing these components in conflicts is that 
the type perspective tends to depersonalize disagreements. 
Colleagues shift from seeing each other as wrong, or willfully 
obstructive, to recognizing that each is operating out of a 
valid perspective that needs to be heard and honored in the 
resolution of the conflict. Conflict resolution becomes much 
easier when both parties invest in the constructive use of 
differences. 


Using Type as a Bridge in 

Dealing with Other Conflicts 

Practitioners have found type is one way to forge common 
ground in conflict situations that are unrelated to type dil- 


ferences. Recognizing type differences may be useful in the 
following kinds of situations: 


m Two departments merge, but old loyalties remain. 





Uses of Type in Organizations 337 


B A team is formed, with people representing dilterent 
parts of the organization and having very different prior- 
ities and approaches. 

m Colleagues from different cultural, racial, ethnic, or edu- 
cational backgrounds find they have difficulty develop- 
ing the trust necessary to work together effectively. 

B Anorganization acquircs another company and integrates 
employees, but finds that the organizational cultural dil- 
ferences are getting in the way of anticipated benefits. 


In all of these examples, very real differences in culture, 
styles, and values need to be negotiated. This works best 
when the people involved can find commonalities as well as 
differences, which are often all too clear. One way of doing 
this is to work with them to find their “common ground" 
(Weisbord, 1992): the goals they share for their work, their 
desire for congenial and supportive colleagues, their com- 
mitment to the organizations success, and so on. 

Using the MBTI with such groups can provide common 
ground on an individual level: People with very different 
cultural values and styles—organizational or national 
find it easy to talk about their type preference similarities 
(Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996). They frequently find similar atti- 
tudes toward school, authority, working on teams, collegial 
relationships, communication styles, and a number of other 
type-related behaviors and values. These personal connec- 
tions developed through use of the MBTI can provide 
respect and trust between type-alike people as thev work to 
negotiate their differences. 

The following example illustrates such a use of type, in 
this case to bridge differences in national cultures and behav- 
iors. An international communications company rcorga- 
nized to gain greater efficiency. This process resulted in the 
forming of a team composed of research and development 
specialists in Sidney, Australia, and Denver, Colorado. They 
did much of their “team” work at long distance, using e- 
mail, fax, and phonc. But the time came when they needed 
to get together, and the Australians came to Denver to work 
for several months. Problems immediately surfaced that 
seemed to be about gender, sex discrimination, social and 
political value differences, and race. The American team was 
headed by a woman (not unheard of in this U.S. company). 
The Australians were unaccustomed to women in leadership 
roles in technical fields and tended to go to her male assis- 
tant for information and direction. And they made jokes that 
were offensive to all of the U.S. women on the team. Mean- 
while, the Australians continued to be annoyed that the 
Americans seemed to know little about Australia, including 
never being able to get the time/date difference right. 

A desperate call to a practitioner who had done numer- 
ous workshops with the U.S. members of this team resulted 
in a workshop using typc and culture concepts to look at 
similarities and differences. Participants first had an intro- 
duction to type and worked in type-alike groups to identity 
common strengths and weaknesses, typc-related values and 
behaviors, and so on. 





338 The Uses of Type 





Then they were grouped by culture—Australia and 
U.S.—and asked to answer a number of questions about 
their countries. Finally, Australians and Americans were 
put together to exchange information about cultural values 





and behaviors. 

The commonalities identified in the typc-alike groups and 
the bonding around “you do it that way too?” earried over 
into the cross-cultural discussions. Participants had devel- 
oped respect as they worked together in the type groups and 
were willing to listen to the information about cultural differ- 
ences. Interestingly, the “worst” offender with racial- and 
gender-stereotyping jokes turned out to be the same type as 
the African-American woman team leader. They had an ener- 
gizing discussion in their type-alike group about all the ways 
people had misunderstood them and, though the racial and 
gender differences didn't disappear, they were able to discuss 
them in an atmosphere of mutual respect. 





Practitioners must never ignore or minimize very real differ- 
ences in the perspectives and experiences of people of dif- 
ferent organizational, cultural, or racial backgrounds; but type 
can be a bridge—a tool for finding commonality among very 
different people—and can create an atmosphere where those 
other differences can be discussed with mutual respect and 
appreciation. 


Using Type in Diversity Training 


The context and ethics of the MBTI assessment tool support 
and encourage diversity: recognizing normal, in-born differ- 
ences between people; respecting peoples right to be who 
they are and to contribute in the ways that are appropriate 
for them; appreciating “gifts differing” (the title of Isabel 
Myers’ 1980 book explaining psychological type); and nego- 
tiating so that each person gets what he or she needs. The 
MBTIS support of the "constructive use of differences" has 
led some practitioners to use the MBTI as part of diversity 
training programs (Lund, 1995). 

There are few published resources and little research on 
uses of the MBTI in diversity training. Until such informa- 
tion is available, practitioners are urged to proceed with 
caution. The ethical prineiples related to the MBTI assume 
that chents can report their natural preferences, claim their 
unique personality patterns, assert their right to be differ- 
ent, and negotiate for mutual respect and support of differ- 
enecs. These assumptions do not describe the reality for 
many co-cultural groups in the United States and other 
countries, where the dominant culture has defined cultural 
values, apptopriate behaviors and personalities, and so on. 

MBII type cannot be used to gloss over or minimize the 
diversity issues of clients from cultures that historically 
have been oppressed. For example, those preferring Intro- 
version in the United States customarily report that they 
have grown up facing biases about their natural introverted 
behaviors and pressures to be someone they are not. 





Research evidence (Chapter 9; Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985) 
confirms that many natural intreverted behaviors are por- 
trayed by other psychologieal instruments in very negative 
ways. And observers interpretations of Introverted behav- 
iors can be largely negative (Thorne &amp; Gough, 1991). 
These experiences may help those preferring Introversion 
to develop understanding and sympathy toward others who 
have been mislabeled and discriminated against by their 
culture; but the experience of those preferring Introversion 
does not in any direct way compare to the experience of 
oppressed groups, especially people of color. 

At the same time, practitioners report that type is a bridge 
in crossing cultures and that workshop participants from 
very different racial, national, and ethnic backgrounds talk 
readily about their type similarities (Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996). 
Used with caution and sensitivity, the MBTI may play a role 
in identifying commonalities as a part of diversity training. 


When Type Should Not Be 
Used in Conflict Resolution 


Van Sant (personal communication, 1998) suggests that, 
while type is invaluable in conflict resolution, there are 
times when it can get in the way and be counterproductive. 
Type should not be used, for example, when one party 
wants to talk type implications and the other does not. The 
intensity of conflicts can be greatly increased if one of the 
parties uses type concepts in a way that stereotypes or 
"explains away” the others perspective. 

Van Sants experience suggests that type may also not be 
helpful when it becomes a way of intellectualizing a conflict 
to avoid acknowledging and validating the emotions expe- 
rienced by the parties in the conflict. 


Resources 


Several of the type resources alrcady mentioned provide 
information that will assist practitioners in recognizing 
type-related conflicts: Introduction to Type (1998), Introduc- 
tion to Type in Organizations (1998), I'm Not Crazy, l'm Just 
Not You (1997), and others. Van Sant and Payne (1995) 
focus on using type in education, but their chapter on 
"Confliet Resolution” has much wider applicability. It 
includes discussions of frequent conflict areas related to 
type preference differences; outlines approaches to solving 
conflicts typical of the function pairs (ST, SE NT, and NF); 
and provides suggestions, tips, and a process for resolving 
conflicts with different types. 


Research for Practitioners 


Early research on psychological type and conflict (Kilmann 
&amp; Thomas, 1975; Mills, Robey, &amp; Smith, 1985) found, in 
general, that Thinking types tended to be assertive and 
competitive in conflict situations, Feeling types favored 
cooperation and accommodation, and those preferring 
Introversion avoided conflict. 





Table 13.7 Preferred Conflict Styles of Types 


Dominant Extraverted Thinking (ET]s) 
Males 
Females 


e eee — 


Compete 


Compromise 


—————————————————— s ron 














Dominant Introverted Thinking (ITPs) 


Column Radio —7— 27-297 n RA 


Compromise 


 ——— 



































Auxiliary Extraverted Thinking (ITJs) Compromise 
Auxiliary Introverted Thinking (ETPs) Compromise 
Dominant Extraverted Feeling (EFJs) Collaborate 
Dominant Introverted Feeling (IFPs) Accommodate 
Auxiliary Extraverted Feeling (IFJs) Accommodate 
Auxiliary Introverted Feeling (EFPs) Accommodate 


Source: From “Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and Confhct-Handling Intention: An 
Interactive Approach,” by T. Q. Percival, V. Smitheram, and M Kelly, 1992, Journal of 
Psychological Ty pe, 23, p. 14. Copynght 1992 by Journal of Psychological Type. Used 
with permission 


Percival, Smitheram, and Kellys (1992) study adminis- 
tered the Thomas-Kilmann Conflict Mode Instrument (MODE) 
and the MBTI to 340 adults. Comparisons by preference 
found relationships similar to those in the earlier studies. 
When they used type dynamics, however, they found even 
more significant relationships. As they stated, "using the 
interactive combinations of scales [dynamics] produced a 
replicable, consistent, and interpretable pattern of results" (p. 
10). For example, dominant extraverted Thinking type males 
identified “Compete” as their preferred strategy for dealing 
with conflicts, while dominant introverted Thinking types 
identified “Compromise.” Dominant extraverted Feeling 
types identified “Collaborate” as their preferred strategy, 
while the other Feeling types preferred “Accommodate.” 
Their findings are summarized in Table 13.7. 


Enhancing Problem Solving 
and Decision Making 


The theory of psychological type suggests that the best 
decisions include using all the perspectives identified by the 
MBTI functions (Sensing, Intuition, Thinking, and Feel- 
ing), and experience with groups in organizations confirms 
this. Isabel Myers first outlined using the four functions in 
decision making, and type experts working in a number of 
different applications areas have developed materials to 
teach this model (see “Resources” section). 

The type decision-making model is straightforward and 
can be taught very quickly after people have been introduced 


Uses of Type in Organizations 


to type. The best way to put it to work for clients is 10 lead 
them through analyzing one of their recent real decisions, 
helping them recognize what they included in their deci- 
sion making and what may have been left out from a type 
perspective. During this process, both individuals and 
groups get insightful glimpses into the areas they usually 
ignore. 

The following are typical results of analyzing group deci- 
sions when one of the functions has been ignored. 

When people do not include the Sensing perspective in 
decision making, they may 


B Be short on data and solve the wrong problem 

B Ignore information from the past that would be helpful 

B Forget to assess the impacts on day-to-day tasks 

B Be off on time frames and structure needed for imple- 
mentation 


Fitzgerald (1992) reported working with a research and 
development team consisting primarily of people who pre- 
ferred Intuition and Thinking. As she worked with them on 
their decision making, they recognized that they had con- 
sistently sabotaged their own work by failing to accurately 
assess the time required to implement projects and failing 
to factor in the actual resources available—all this in spite 
of several experiences where these failings had created 
problems for them. 

When people do not include the Intuitive perspective in 
decision making, they may 


B Be limited by what has been tried before 

B Ignore information about options being tried by other 
organizations or groups 

B Forget to see the interactions that will occur when the 
plan is implemented 

B Find short-term solutions 


Clancy (1997) reported that the CEO of an engineering 
company proposed restructuring managers’ roles to flatten 
the organization and empower employees. He saw this as 
necessary because increasing demands on managers would 
soon make their job responsibilities overwhelming. The line 
managers, who were primarily Sensing types, rejected the 
plan because “we're doing OK—if it aint broke, dont fix it.” 
A year later, as their job responsibilities had grown, many of 
the managers saw the wisdom of the CEOs foresight. 

When people do not include the Thinking perspective in 
decision making, they may 


B Fail to assess the logical consequences of each alternative 

B Respond primarily to the needs of the people in the 
immediate situation 

B Be overly influenced by the views of trusted people 

B Devclop solutions that are inconsistent with previous 
decisions or organizational policies 


The volunteer board of a nonprofit career development 
center consisting primarily of Fecling types found that their 


339 


340 The Uses of Type 


decision making was not working well for the center: They 
had failed to raise client fees when they needed to and had 
approved expenditures for good and valuable activities for 
which they did not really have the funds. In assessing the 
decision making ihat had led them into this financial hole, 
they recognized that their meetings focused on trying to 
accommodate the views of all the board members and that 
they had persuaded themselves that “good” programs would 
result in increased clients and would pay their own way. 

When people do not include the Feeling perspective in 
decision making, they may 


B De limited by failing to get information from the people 
who are involved 

B Ignore the impacts on peoples life and work 

8 Forget to evaluate the decision by organizational or 
group values 

B Develop solutions that are logical but impossible to actu- 
ally achieve 


Alter an introduction to type workshop, the leadership 
team of a medical center, consisting entirely of Thinking 
types, exclaimed, “We wish we'd had this before we an- 
nounced our latest reorganization. We planned everything 
so meticulously. The reorganization was state of the art, and 
our rationale was brilliant. But we forgot the people. When 
we announced it, we really got sandbagged." 


Using the Information 


Once a group has analyzed the members’ usual decision- 
making style, it can do as the medieal center lcadership 
team above did: The team produeed a chart for the wall of 
the conference room that listed the four funetions and 
questions commonly assoeiated with the functions. They 
put “Feeling judgment” and the questions related to that in 
red letters and committed to each other that they would 
review each deeision with the chart before finalizing. 
Kendall and Carr (1997) report using a similar approach in 
their “Looking Glass” courses, which use management sim- 
ulations to improve leadership and decision making. 


The Missing Feeling Function 


The function most frequently ignored in deeision making in 
Western organizations (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 1997b) is Feel- 
ing judgment. Rescarch on managers and leaders of organi- 
zations reports an overrepresentation of Thinking types in 
proportion both to the overall population and to reports of 
the Thinking-Fecling distributions within organizations. 

The cultural values of organizations tend to support 
Thinking approaches to decision making: Be objective, 
detached, hard headed; put emotions and loyalty aside; fol- 
low the logic wherever it leads. The results of such one- 
sided decision making can create serious problems (Noer, 
1995; Molpus, 1997). 


Resources 


Isabel Myers described using the perspectives provided by 
each of the four functions to improve decision making 
(Myers, 1980/1995, especially pp. 194—196). Others have 
developed and refined her ideas into decision-making 
models: 

Gordon Lawrences (n.d.) “Zig-Zag Process for Problem 
Solving" and Katharine Myers (n.d.) “Deeision Making and 
Type” are handouts that outline the process of using the four 
functions in decision making. “Type and Problem Solving" 
in Introduction to Type (Myers, with Kirby &amp; Myers, 1998) 
provides similar information in a somewhat different form, 
and "Problem-Solving Process Using Type Preferences" in 
Introduction to Typc in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; Kummerow, 
1998) also suggests ways to use Myers’ approach. 

All of these provide the basic perspectives needed to get 
a group started. The members' own experiences will likely 
lead them to develop questions appropriate for their setting. 


Research for Practitioners 


The research on decision-making styles and type is not as 
clear as that on communication styles (Walck, 1996), with 
situational factors playing a very significant role in the way 
decisions are made. Huitt (1992) provides an outline of the 
steps in problem solving and suggests ways that type may 
relate to each step. Haley and Pini (1994) reported on their 
observations of groups of managers in Italy and Mexico 
engaged in problem-solving exercises. The researchers sum- 
marized their observations in terms of combinations of the 
functions, ST, SE NT, and NE and reported them in three 
areas: input bias (information sought and used), output bias 
(basis for generating alternatives), and operational bias (basis 
for decisions). Their results are summarized in Table 13.8. 

Reviewing Walck’s summary and other research on type 
and decision making points to a problem in type research 
that was identificd by Yeakley (1982, 1983) when he 
reviewed the research on communication styles: Because 
type is dynamic, attempting to find correlations and rela- 
tionships between one MBTI preference dichotomy and 
some aspect of decision making may lead to frustration. 

For example, though all eight types that prefer Feeling 
will share some definable characteristies, the other threc 
preferences wil] interact with the Feeling judgment in vari- 
ous ways to create cight distinctive ways Fecling judgment is 
used. Similarly, though ENTJs and ENFJs differ on only one 
preference, ENTJs extravert their dominant Thinking func- 
tion and will make decisions very differently from ENFJs, 
who extravert their dominant Feeling function. And domi- 
nant introverted Thinking types (ISTP and INTP) report 
using very different decision-making processes from those 
characteristic of dominant extraverted Thinking types. 

Decision making is a complex process. Jungs theory of 
human personality describes peoples basic styles of taking 


Uses of Type in Organizations 341 


Table 13.8 MBTI Function Pairs and Decision Making 


SI 





Input bias (Informatian 
saught and used) 


Specific facts (may ignore 
patterns) 


————————————————— — — dntstnindu eub IA "——— 





Output bias (Basis far 
generating alternatives) 


Problem-solving models 
that have worked in the 
past 


m——— m ——— €——«—————— —— € — — — A ———————s 


Operational bias (Basis 
for decisians) 


Regularity, structure, and 
"fit" with standard 
practices 


Systematic patterns (may The opinions of specific 
ignore specifics that 
differ from model) 


SF NF 


Symbols, imagery, and 
people (may ignore metaphors (may ignore 
hard data) practical data) 





Data that confirm their 
conceptual pattern 


Logical categorization 
based on their 
conceptual pattern 


n——————— X r senile, O EA ———— 


Options supported by Analogies and novel 
important people ideas 


————————— —HPPERPBARP PIERII eee eee TRA ——— = — —R—— 


Associations from 
similar experiences or 
their vision of the future 


What people in the 
situation need or want 


Source From “Blazing International Trails in Strategic Decision-Making Research,” by C. V Haley and R. Pim, 1994, in Proceedings of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and Leader- 
ship. An International Research Conference. p. 22. College Park, MD: National Leadership Insutute. 


in information and making decisions; expanding individ- 
uals’ natural styles through use of ihe MBTI will lead to 
considering a broader range of information and to apply- 
ing principles and values more consciously in decision 
making. 


Planning, Implementing, and 
Managing Organizational Change 


After decades of fairly stable organizational structures, the 
1990s saw an increasing wave of organizational change, and 
experts predict that this is just the beginning. The combina- 
tion of advances in information technology and globalizing 
of markets creates a radically different economic environ- 
ment from the one that prevailed in industrialized countries 
in the post-World War 11 decades. The result is a revolution 
in organizational structures, in the ways people work, and 
in the meaning of work. 


Organizational Change Experts 


This revolution in the ways people work and organizations 
are structured has spawned a host of analyses, blueprints, 
and guides to effective organizational change. In type terms, 
almost all of these are NT blueprints: They give the rational 
analysis and the big picture, usually leaving out the spe- 
cifics (S) of exactly what this will look like and how to get 
from here to there. They also tend to ignore the Feeling per- 
spective of what people need to survive and prosper in 
the new organization. Both William Bridges (1992b, 1994) 
and David Noer (1993) focused their organizational change 
work on the people of the organization. 

Even when these change experts recognize the impacts 
on people, they typically have not taken into account the 


normal differences in how people respond to organizational 
change, what they need to accept and support change, and 
the particular strengths and weaknesses ihey may bring to 
the current organizational environment. (Bridges, 1994, is 
the partial exception: in the career development section of 
JobShift he includes a bricf temperament discussion.) 

In type terms, most attention to “the people” during 
organizational change seems to be a recommendation that 
everyone act like ENTPs (For example, see Pritchett, n.d.): 


B FE: Look outward to the market, network with people, 
take quick action. 

B N: See the big picture, have vision, use “out-of-the-box” 
thinking. 

B I: Recognize that the past is gone, move ahead in a 
detached and rational way to fit vourself into the future. 

B P: Be flexible, change directions quickly, give up the 
need for structure. 


In some ways, this makes sense: The advice is that every 
employee become an entrepreneur, take charge of his or her 
own work life; and, indeed, type distributions of entre- 
preneurs tend to show an overrepresentation of NTPs 
(Reynierse, 1997). From a type perspective of normal dif- 
ferences and the value of all types, however, this exhorta- 
tion to, in effect, change ones type is not very useful. When 
most organizational change programs do not achieve the 
desired results and the primary reason found is “the peo- 
ple," the MBTI can make an important contribution. 


Using Type to Facilitate Organizational Change 


Whatever change model or restructuring plan an organiza- 
tion decides to use, the success of each step in the process 
depends upon the energy, flexibility, creativity; and commit- 
ment of the people in the organization. To be successful, the 
planning, implementing, and managing ol change needs to 


342 The Uses of Type 


Table 13.9 What Each Preference Needs During Organizational Change 


Extraversion 





Time to talk about what is going on 
Involvement—something to do 

Communication, communication, communication 
To be heard—to have a voice 


Action, getting on with it, keeping up the pace 





—— — nma ———— tet 


Sensing 


Introversion 


OO i IIT Pa o 9 e e 0 Nl th 7 I t no A ptr D LD D 7 Fa o tete ct De Dim e us D Ey ue aire TT a ai n 90 i en Ds aea t 


Time alone to reflect on what is going on 
To be asked what they think about things 
Thought-out, written communication and one-on-one discussions 


Time to think through their positions before discussions 
or meetings 


Time to assimilate changes before taking action 





n t E e 


Intuition 





Real data—why is change occurring? 

Specifics and details about what exactly is to change 
Connections between the planned changes and the past 
Realistic pictures of the future that make the plans real 


Clear guidelines on expectations, roles, and responsibilities— 
or the opportunity to design them 


——————————————————————————— € eh N an serenity pao 


Thinking 


The logic—why? 

What systemic changes will there be? Why? 
Clarity in the decision making and the planning 
What are the goals? What will be the structure? 
Demonstration that leadership is competent 


Fairness and equitability in the changes 


e~ s DAT 


Judging 


A clear, concise plan of action 

Defined outcomes, clear goals 

A time frame, with each stage spelled out 
A clear statement of priorities , 

No more surprises! 


Completion—get the change in place 


ELLE eR en ep ee en et a ee rt in i ote: ib "ror r uan: roa t= 


The overall rationale—the global realities 
A general plan or direction to play around with and develop 


Chances to paint a picture of the future—to create a vision that 
works for them 


Options—a general direction, but not too much structure 


Opportunities to participate in designing the future, to influence 
the changes 


SN nM ny te A Eu tet a sae a ge domi a Ar d m Tm a tte 





Feeling 


Recognition of the impacts on people 
How will people's needs be dealt with? 


Inclusion of themselves and others in the planning and implementing 
of change 


What values underlie the changes? Are they the right ones? 
Demonstration that leadership cares 


Appreciation and support 








a DTI Res A c ApGin C aia a0 a tcr tna mtt 


Perceiving 


An open-ended plan 

The general parameters 

Flexibility, with lots of options 

Information and the opportunity to gather more 
Loosen up, don't panic, trust the process 

Room to adjust goals and plans as the process continues 


Source’ From The Challenge of Change in Organizations, pp. 22-37, by N J] Barger and L K. Kirby, 1995 Palo Alto, CA Davies-Black. Copyngbt 1995 


by Davies-Black. Used with permission 


include providing what people need to make fundamental 
transitions in their lives. As in other applications, MBTI 
type provides a rational structure for understanding those 
needs and points to ways they ean be met. 

Barger and Kirby (19952) integrated type and William 
Bridges’ (1980, 1992b) model of stages of transitions in work- 
shops for leaders and employees in organizations undergoing 
change. They report results from 2,000 workshop partici- 
pants responding to the question, "What does this preference 
need during a time of change?" Table 13.9 summarizes the 
responses by preference. This kind of information—gathered 
from employees in the organization—can provide a checklist 
for leaders. 





Information and Inclusion 


Type also provides guidance for responding to the common, 
shared concerns of people during change. People report 
two overriding needs: the desire to be included in the 
process in some way and a hunger for information. Practi- 
tioners working with organizations during change can draw 
on the section on communication to ensure that all the 
types receive the kinds of information they need to accept 
and support changes; but the stress of change mcans that 
peoples needs for information increase. Even communica- 
tion that is well balanced to meet the needs of different 
types is probably not enough. William Bridges’ (1992b) 





Uses of Iype m Organizations 343 


Table 13.10 Thinking—Feeling During the Grieving Process 


Thinking 


Strengths in dealing with lasses and endings 
exhibit calmness 
step back, apply detached logic 
take charge 
"cut loose" and move on 


problem-solve 


os a eee I 





Problem areas in dealing with grieving 
have difficulty accessing their own emotions and grieving 


feel overwhelmed and powerless when they experience their 
Own strong emotions 


are impatient and uncomfortable with others’ emotions 
can be overwhelmed by unprocessed emotions 


Feeling 


Strengths in dealing with lasses and endings 
expect to experience emotions 
are attuned to others’ emotional experience 
seek support 
offer support—are good listeners and sympathizers 


will take time to process emotional issues 


Dr meron aree - Tapana 


Problem areas in dealing with grieving 
can get stuck in negative emotions 


experience everyone's pain, can be distracted by their own 
and others' emotions 


find it difficult to see beyond the immediate personal turmoil 


overdo supportive role 


ee ST ee AZ VE age TE nn ee Se eee eee 


Source: From The Challenge of Change m Organizations, pp. 87-90, by N. J. Barger and L K. Kirby, 1995 Palo Alto, CA Davies-Black. Copyright 1995 


by Davies-Black. Used with permission 


term is over-communicate, and thats a good guide: Do more 
of all the different ways of communicating. 

All types want to be included in decisions being made 
that affect their lives in fundamental ways. One of the pri- 
mary reasons for problems that arise during organizational 
change is that, typically, a small group of leaders or a task 
force has analyzed the present, explored the options, and 
then made a decision. They announce this exciting reorga- 
nization or restructuring only to find most others in the 
organization raising doubts, critiquing, feeling anxious, and 
losing motivation. For all those who were not part of the 
process, the change feels imposed on them, and its natural 
tO resist. 

Thinking types can be included by presenting current 
ideas and alternatives during the process of deciding, asking 
for their analytical critique, and then paying attention to it. 
For Feeling types, inclusion generally can be achieved simi- 
larly, but the questions they want to pursue are the following: 
How will this affect the people of the organization? What 
will we do to support people during the change? What 
kinds of values are held by those making the decisions? Do 
I trust them? 

For those responsible for leading organizational change, 
including people in these ways often seems too time- 
consuming and confusing—all those different questions and 
ideas! This can be particularly challenging to that majority of 
leaders whose type includes Thinking and Judging. TJs like 
to make decisions by gathering relevant information and 
choosing the most logical alternative. They then want to 
state goals and a plan and move ahead to implement. 

However, Thinking-Judging types also highly value 
being effective and competent. When they understand that 
their most comfortable style is one that will likely create 





resistance and simply wont work—however logical it is on 
paper—they can move efficiently to inform and include. 


Resources 


William Bridges’ Managing Transitions (1992b) persuasively 
describes the stages people and groups go through during 
transitions. His recognition of the need to grieve about what 
is being lost and his description of the confusions of the 
“neutral zone” are particularly helpful, and he includes a lot 
of information about supporting people through this process. 

Bridges’ model of transition stages provided the struc- 
ture for Barger and Kirby's The Challenge of Change in Orga- 
nizations (1995), which integrates the responses and needs 
of different types during each stage. Their findings about 
the Thinking-Feeling dichotomy and Bridges’ “endings” 
are summarized in Table 13.10. Because they found that 
each type has its own pattern in responding to organiza- 
tional change, Barger and Kirby include one-page sum- 
maries for each of the 16 types, with information about 
what each type contributes, what each finds difficult, and 
typical ways each resists change. 

Barger and Kirby (1997a, 1997b) also wrote MBTI Type 
and Change and MBTI Type and Change Participants Guide, a 
structured program with reproducible masters for using the 
MBTI with people in organizations undergoing change. 
Topics include developing a metaphor for change: MBTI 
type preferences and change; dealing with the impact ot 
organizational change; dealing with loss and grieving; and 
restoring identity and meaning. Along with workshop 
agendas, scripts, and exercises on these topics, the guide 
also gives directions for adapting the programs to specific 
organizations and situations. 


344 The Uses of Type 


Sandra Hirshs (1992a) MBTI Team Building Program 
includes a section on helping teams deal with organizational 
change, focusing on the four quadrants of the type table: IS, 
ES, IN, and EN. Her approach described there, with repro- 
ducible masters and a team participant guide, has wider 
applicability and can be used throughout the organization. 

WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, &amp; Kirby, 1997) pro- 
vides suggestions for individual employees in a chapter on 
managing change, while Barger &amp; Kirbys organizational 
change chapter in Developing Leaders (1997c) focuses on 
leaders of different types. 


Research for Practitioners 


Walck (1996) summarized studies ol leaders during cbange. 
Several correlated MBTI preferences with the Kirton Adap- 
tion and Innovation Inventory (KAL). They generally found 
significant correlations between "Innovation" on the KAI 
and preferences for Intuition and Perceiving on the MBTI; 
conversely, “Adaptation” correlated with MBTI preferences 
for Sensing and Judging. 

Such rescarch—like much of the current expert advice 
on organizational change—needs to be interpreted with 
care by practitioners. The bias of change experts is for 
“transformational” change, and NPs are most likely to 
exhibit characteristics associated with this. However, trans- 
formational change programs have a high rate of failure, 
perhaps in part because of the missing type perspectives. 

Clancys (1997) analysis of STJs during organizational 
change provides a crucial perspective for recognizing these 
types’ contributions to change and their style of leading 
change programs. Her chapter addresses the “conventional 
wisdom in the type community” (p. +15)—that STJs have 
the most difficulty dealing with organizational change—by 
listing STJ behaviors that are interpreted by others as “resis- 
tance” and then explaining their basis and purpose for STJs. 
She also identifies what STJs need in order to support orga- 
nizational change programs. 

Because STJs comprise so great a part of the workforce in 
most organizations, and because much of the research 
implies that Intuitives deal better with change, practitioners 
need to have the context and information provided by 
Clancy in interpreting and using this research. MBTI practi- 
tioners dealing with changing organizations note that all 
types will “resist” change if they are not informed and 
included. All types will struggle in making needed changes 
if their needs are not met by the organization. 


Summary 


Helping organizations and employees deal with ongoing 
change may be the organizational development specialists 
greatest challenge. Integrating MBTI type knowledge and 
perspectives into change programs has proven invaluable— 
to individual employees and leaders and to the organization. 


Recognizing and Managing Stress 


Stress is an integral and perhaps inevitable part of organiza- 
tional life. Organizations place multiple, sometimes contra- 
dictory, and often rapidly changing demands on all person- 
nel. The variety and continuity of stressors in the workplace 
provide a *living laboratory" for recognizing the distinctive 
ways in which people of each of the 16 types experience and 
react to stress. Individuals at all levels of the organization 
can benefit from understanding how they, their co-workers, 
their supervisors, and those they supervise dcal with the 
stresses of the work environment. Such knowledge encour- 
ages type-appropriate ways of managing stress. Stress man- 
agement has obvious benefits in increased work output, 
fewer sick days due to stress-related illnesses, decreased 
employee burnout and job turnover, and other benefits that 
result from greater employee comfort and satisfaction. 

There are two relevant areas in exploring organizational 
stress in relation to psychological type. The first refers to 
the particular work situations that each type finds espe- 
cially stressful and the second to the ways each type tends 
to react to such stress. Both the sources of stress for each 
type and the responses to stress are predictable from type 
theory. Because the theory is based on thc different 
amounts of energy each type has available for different 
kind of activities, we can observe the effects of these energy 
differences for each dichotomy as well as at the level of 
whole types. The next section focuses on stress issues for 
each dichotomy. 


The MBTI Dichotomies 


People tend to be energized when using their preferences 
and fatigued when using their less preferred functions and 
attitudes. Energy depletion, in addition to the dissatisfac- 
tion of doing things that dont “come naturally,” is an obvi- 
ous way to cause stress. For example, Introverts are likely to 
[eel energized when left alone to complete a project, while 
Extraverts may find this stressful and fatiguing. People who 
prefer Sensing find carefully checking the facts of a report to 
be satisfying while those who prefer Intuition would likely 
find this activity tiring and unmotivating. Providing fre- 
quent positive feedback to employees will feel natural and 
satisfying for a person who prefers Feeling but unnecessary, 
awkward, and draining to many Thinking types. Working 
within a set structure is often stressful for people with a Per- 
ceiving attitude, while it is comfortable and satisfying for 
those with a Judging attitude. 

Table 13.11 shows the kinds of activities that are likely 
to be stressful for people having each preference. The table 
is an adaptation of material presented in WORKTypes 
(Kummerow, Barger, &amp; Kirby, 1997). 

As can be inferred irom Table 13.11, stress depends on 
the point of view of each type or type preference. The likely 


Table 13.11 


Stressors for Extraverts 





working alone 

having to communicate mainly by e-mail 
lengthy work periods with no interruptions 
having to reflect before taking action 
having to focus in depth on one thing 


getting feedback in writing only 


a OE ILO m a a 


Stressors for Sensing Types 


345 


Uses of Type in Organizations 


Typical Work Stressors for Each of the Eight MBTI Preferences 


Stressors for Introverts 








working with others 

talking on the phone a lot 

interacting with others frequently 

having to act quickly without reflection 
too many concurrent tasks and demands 


getting frequent verbal feedback 


Vg m Du NI p Pap AY RE SG ARS mnm ss o pers néscyurt949-4 ddp 


Stressors for Intuitive Types 





attending to own and others' insights 
having to do old things in new ways 
having to give an overview without details 
looking for the meaning in the facts 
focusing on possibilities 
too many complexities 


erate - Ja a ge MIS T a 7 te TT Dmm m mmt ot ta am apr ma n af 000996 35 gu women dt acm 








Stressors for Thinking Types 


having to attend to realities 

having to do things the proven way 
having to attend to details 

checking the accuracy of facts 
needing to focus on past experience 


Stressors for Feeling Types 





using personal experience to assess situations 
adjusting to individual differences and needs 

noticing and appreciating what is positive 

focusing on processes and people 

using empathy and personal values to make decisions 


having others react to questioning as divisive 


EO Rie RD Det La Rot at Ecc = 


— vtot tP 


Stressors for Judging Types 


waiting for structure to emerge from process 

being expected to use "inner timing" 

too much flexibility around time frames and deadlines 
having to marshal energy at the last minute 

staying open to reevaluations of tasks 

dealing with surprises 


OR aea a T ET = on as ap e 


analyzing situations objectively 

setting criteria and standards 

critiquing and focusing on flaws 

focusing on tasks only 

being expected to use logic alone to make decisions 
asking questions that feel divisive 


Stressors for Perceiving Types 


having to organize selves' and others' planning 
working within time frames and deadlines 
others' distrust of last-minute energy 

having to finish and move on 

developing contingency plans 

being required to plan ahead 


Er eee re i a o_o Ee ee 


Source From WORK Types, pp. 198-199, by ] M. Kummerow, N J Barger, and L K. Kirby, 1997. New York Warner Books. Copyright 1997 by ] M Kummerow, N J. Barger, 


and L K Kirby. Used with permission. 


rcaction to overdoing a less-preferred function or attitude is 
to show onc or more of the following: irritability, resistance, 
low motivation, short temper, discouragement, self-blame 
and blaming of others. A natural solution to this kind of 
stress is to avoid tasks and situations that create it. How- 
ever, avoiding stressful tasks and situations is not always 
possible. For those situations, an adaptive and effective 
approach is to recognize, accept, and moderate the context 
within which the stress occurs. Managers, team leaders, and 
people throughout the organization can use the relatively 
straightforward differences in Table 13.11 to modily their 
demands and expectations of themselves and others. 


A simple and effective approach when one must work 
out of ones opposite preferences (as is often the case) is to 
acknowledge to oneself and/or appropriate others that the 
activity is "typologically stressful," anticipate that it is likely 
to trigger a “typologically predictable" stress reaction, and 
try to arrange at least a minimum amount of time for activi- 
ties that replenish and reenergize preferred functions and 
attitudes. For example, an Introvert who anticipates with 
dread a weck filled with lengthy daily meetings might plan 
her lunch hours alone in the park; a Feeling type who has 
to spend the week doing employee performance reviews 
might take extra time giving positive feedback to others. 


346 The Uses of Type 


Dynamic Types 


What each type finds especially stressful in the workplace 
and typical reactions to stress are understandable and pre- 
dictable from a knowledge of the characteristics of the dom- 
inant function of each type. Both theory and experience 
show that in general, what each type finds particularly 
stressful are activities and perspectives that disregard the 
core needs and values of the dominant function and force 
attention to the opposite, infcrior, function. For example, 
ESTPs (dominant extraverted Sensing) will likely be stressed 
by having to spend a week working alone on a long-term 
strategic plan, an activity that requires use of their inferior 
introverted Intuition. ISFJs (dominant introverted Sensing) 
might find it stressful to be given a leadership role in a 
rapidly changing department. 

Theory and experience also show that the types respond 
differently to moderate, short-term stress as compared to 
more extreme and long-lasting stress. The typical response 
to moderate stress is exaggeration of the dominant func- 
tion—an overdoing of our natural reliance on the most com- 
fortable and developed part of our personality. Barger and 
Kirby (19952) describe each dominant function as it appears 
at its best as well as in exaggerated form. For example, dom- 
inant extraverted Intuitives (ENTP, ENFP), who by nature 
form global pictures and are fast paced, under moderate 
stress become obsessed with the links between things and 
spin out of control. Dominant extraverted Thinking types 
(EST), ENTJ), who are naturally cool-headed and analytical, 
become coldly detached when in an exaggerated state and 
try to dominate others by criticizing them. The same princi- 
ple applies to the dominant function of the other types. 

More extreme and persistent stress is likely to call forth 
out-of-character reactions for each of the types. From a 
dynamic point of view, the exaggerated use of energy of the 
dominant function ereates an imbalance that produces an 
equal but opposite expression of energy from the least 
developed, least experienced, and most uncontrollable 
function—the opposite, inferior, function. For example, an 
ESFJ (dominant extraverted Feeling) experiencing extreme 
stress may "change" from a congenial, helpful person who 
strives to affirm others to one who is bitingly critical, nega- 
tive, and sarcastic. An INTP (dominant introverted Think- 
ing) under great stress is likely to lose contact with her typi- 
cal objectivity and detachment and become focused entirely 
on whether people like and appreciate her as a person. 

Consult the resources in this section for publications 
that provide detailed discussions of the type-related triggers 
to stress and typical responses to and expressions of both 
moderate and more extreme stress. 





The Advantages of Recognizing Stress 
in the Workplace 


Type theory and the MBTI provide a rationale for individual 
responses to stress in the workplace, promote understand- 
ing of the sources and naturc of what proves stressful for 


people, and encourage a helpful perspective for assessing 
and dealing with individuals, groups of individuals, and 
organizations under stress. Barger and Kirby (19952) focused 
on the kind of stress that accompanies change and transition 
in organizations. They provide information and recommen- 
dations for dealing with change that are based on what is 
stressful for each type during change and what each type 
needs to make necessary changes as comfortably as possi- 
ble. When people in organizations understand the dynamic 
character of each type, they are generally less surprised, 
angry, anxious, and frustrated by their own and others 
reaction to organizational stress. Acceptance, understand- 
ing, tolerance, and a cooperative outlook become possible. 
At the very least, the ability to recognize the predictability 
of exaggerated and out-of-character reactions puts the 
assessment of such stress-stimulated behavior in perspec- 
tive. Peoples exaggerated and out-of-character responses 
are then less likely to be seen as serious problems or perma- 
nent personality aberrations. 


Resources 


The Challenge of Change in Organizations (Barger &amp; Kirby, 
1995a) provides a wealth of material on types and their reac- 
tions to the stress of change and transition in today’s organi- 
zational climate. Many examples and case studies are pro- 
vided. WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, &amp; Kirby, 1997) 
discusses stress as experienced by each type with examples 
illustrating stress responses. Beside Ourselves: Our Hidden 
Personality in Everyday Life (Quenk, 1993) gives the rationale 
for the eruption of the inferior function in response to more 
extreme and long-term stress and provides many examples 
and case studies of individual types as well as the interactions 
of types in personal and work relationships. In addition, a 
concise presentation of material about the inferior functions 
appcars in the booklet In the Grip (Quenk, 1996), which is 
part of the Introduction to Type series. Also helpful is Work It 
Out: Clues for Solving People Problems at Work (Hirsh with 
Kise, 1996), which provides examples of the effects of the 
inferior function on different types in work situations. 


Research for Practitioners 


Recent research on type and stress-related physical condi- 
tion, psychological issues, and coping behavior is covered 
in detail in Chapter 10 and summarized and discussed in 
tables 4.4—4.41 in Chapter +. A detailed review of earlier 
research on health, stress, and coping appears in Shelton 
(1996). Of particular interest is research pinpointing the 
number and kinds of resources the types report in dealing 
with stress, as well as evidence that different types are 
affected differently by the environment. Hammer (summa- 
rized in Shelton, 1996) used the Coping Resource Inven- 
tory (CRI) to study type differences in a sample that 
included MBA students, residence hall workers, stress man- 
agement program clients, and pain patients. The CRI mea- 
sures cognitive, social, emotional, spiritual/philosophical, 


DT 


Uses of Iype in Organizations 


Table 13.12 Ranking of Resources for Each Type 


ISTJ (12) ISF) (7) 


Cognitive (10) Spiritual/Philosophical (4) 


Spiritual/Philosophical (10) Cognitive (5) 
Social (11) Social (5) 
Physical (11) Physical (7) 


Emotional (13) Emotional (10) 





ISTP (9) ISFP (15) 
















Spiritual/Philosophical (1) Social (10) 


Cognitive (4) Spiritual/Philosophical (12) 
Physical (S) Cognitive (14) 
Social (16) Emotional (15) 


Emotional (9) Physical (16) 





ESTP (14) 


Physical (8) 
Emotiona! (12) 

Social (13) 
Spiritual/Philosophical (15) 





ESFP (10) 
















Emotional (3) 
Social (6) 
Cognitive (9) 
Physical (15) 


Cognitive (16) Spiritual/Philosophical (16) 


EST) (2) 





ESF] (5) 








Cognitive (1) Spiricual/Philosophical (2) 
Social (4) 


Emotional (7) 


Emotional (2) 

Social (2) 

Physical (3) 
Spiritual/Philosophical (11) 


Cognitive (8) 
Physical (10) 


















































INF] (4) INT) (11) 





Spiritual/Philosophical (1) Spiritual/Philosophical (3) 







Cognitive (4) Cognitive (7) 
Physical (5) Emotional (11) 
Social (8) Physical (13) 


Emotional (9) Social (14) 











INFP (13) INTP (16) 
















Physical (9) Physical (12) 
Social (12) Spiritual/Philosophical (14) 
Cognitive (13) Cognitive (15) 





Spiritual/Philosophical (13) Social (15) 


Emotional (16) 





Emotional (14) 


ENFP (1) ENTP (8) 



















Social (1) Physical (6) 

Emotional (1) Emotional (6) 

Cognitive (2) Social (9) 

Physical (4) Spiritual/Philosophical (9) 





Spiritual/Philosophical (7) Cognitive (11) 

















ENF] (3) ENT) (6) 




















Social (3) Physical (1) 
Cognitive (3) Cognitive (6) 
Emotional (4) Social (7) 


Spiritual/Philosophical (5) 
Physical (14) 


Spiritual/Philosophical (8) 





Emotional (8) 


—-——— EG A MC NCC NA Se Ba DHT NNUS D ML EE En ae eee es 


Note: Numbers in parentheses after each resource indicate where each type ranked on that resource compared to other types, numbers in parentheses after 


each type indicate the ranking of that type on total resources. 


Source: From MBTI Applications. A Decade of Research on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (p 206), A L Hammer, editor, 1996 Palo Alto, CA Consulung Psychologists Press. 


Copyright 1996 by Consulting Psychologists Press. Used with permission 


and physical coping resources. The types found to have the 
highest total resources were ENFP and ESIJ, and the type 
with the lowest score was INTP Each type showed a differ- 
ent order of typical use of each of the five coping resources. 
For example, social resources had the top rank and physical 
resources the bottom rank for ENFJs; emotional was the top 
rank and spiritual/philosophical the bottom rank for ESFPs. 

It can be quite helpful to be sensitive to the different 
ways that each type copes with stress. Just as each of us is 
likely to evaluate others’ behavior from the point of view of 
our own type, so are we likely to assume that others cope 
with stress in ihe same way we do. When this happens, 
well-meaning efforts to help someone deal with stress can 
backfire and create even more stress for the individual. For 
example, suggesting to an ENFJ that he join an athletic club 
and work out every day would not be consistent with the 
low ranking of physical coping resources for ENFJs. Of 


course, individual differences within a type might show 
that a particular ENFJ does in fact use such a coping 
resource. Table 13.12 shows the rankings of resources for 
each type, each types rank as compared to all other types, 
and the ranking of each type on total resources. 

The association of type preferences with different kinds 
of stressful stimuli was explored by Short and Grasha 
(1995) in a sample of managers. They looked at sources ot 
stress, coping strategies, and personality moderator vari- 
ables in relation to MBII continuous scores. They found 
that sensation-seeking, assertiveness, and “social hardiness” 
were significantly associated with Extraversion; social stress 
was associated with Introversion; Thinking was correlated 
with Type A behavior, assertiveness, and perceptions of 
problem-solving skills; Judging was related to effective time 
management and Perceiving to sensation-seeking. As a 
result of a number of different analyses of their data, these 


348 The Uses of Type 


researchers concluded that the E-1 dichotomy was the best 
predictor of stress and coping and was also related to per- 
ceptions of stress. In addition, they found that results for 
the other dichotomies were limited to perceptions of coping 
rather than to stress itself. These findings with regard to the 
relation of Extraversion and Introversion to stress and cop- 
ing variables are in accord with the findings of Hammer 
described earlier, as well as with a variety of results reported 
in Chapter 10 and sumunarized in Chapter 4. 


Using the MBTI with Teams 


Teams, teamwork, and team building are central concerns 
for practitioners working with organizations. Hammer and 
Huszczo (1996) reported that a survey of companies by the 
New York Stock Exchange in 1982 found that more than 
80% of companies use teams for at least some parts of their 
work, and the use of teams has increased rapidly in the last 
few vears (Wellins, Byham, &amp; Wilson, 1991; Katzenbach &amp; 
Smith, 1993). 

The practitioners job in working with teams is to facilitate 
their working together effectively, and the MBTI has proven to 
be a valuable tool in meeting this challenge. Myers and 
McCaulley pioneered the first use of the MBTI as a tool to 
increase team effectiveness in their work with health care 
teams in 1974 (Myers, 1974). Though type practitioners have 
developed a wide variety of new activities, exercises, and 
resource materials, the basic assumptions underlving using 
the MBTI with teams remain the same: Knowledge of individ- 
ual differences will help teams identify the particular talents 
and gifts that each member brings to his or her task; and this 
knowledge can help reduce conflict by reframing potential 
sources of misunderstanding as natural individual differences. 


Guidelines for Using Type with Teams 


The general guidelines for using the MBTI in organizations 
(see section “Administering and Interpreting" at the end of 
this chapter) apply, and there are some additional ones that 
arc especially helpful in working with teams: 


B Introduce type and the MBTI with a specific goal, prefer- 
ably to deal with a problem the team has identified: 
improve communication, enhance problem solving, 
team development, etc. 

B As muchas possible, place type and the MBTI within the 
context of everyday work. For example, after describing 
a preference, practitioners can ask the team to brain- 
storm ways the behaviors associated with this preference 
would contribute to teamwork. 

B Use the MBTI early on in working with a team, rather 
than introducing it after conflicts have developed. When 
a team is struggling to agree on budgets, division of 
tasks, reporting, or other such issues, introducing the 


MBTI to help address the conflict can lead to team mem- 
hers using type as an excuse or to stereotype people: 
“You're an S; you do the budget.” 

B Introduce type dynamics and development early on in 
your work with a team. Understanding ones own and 
others’ dominant function assists in identifying core val- 
ues and motivations; it gets at the heart of what people 
find rewarding and energizing at work. The recognition 
of what types extravert and introvert is crucial in team 
communication. This deeper level of type is invaluable 
to teams. 

B Lead the team in a team type analysis: What preferences 
predominate in the group? Which are missing? What are 
the dominant functions? How may the distributions 
affect working together? For example, a team consisting 
of.an EST] an ENT], an ENF], an INTP andans F PIRAS 
all dominant Judging types. Recognizing this may lead 
the team to form agreements around gathering enough 
information before rushing to judgment. Likewise, a 
team consisting primarily of dominant Perceiving types 
may recognize that members need to push themselves to 
make decisions in a timely way, before they have all the 
information everyone would like to have. 

B Provide information to the team about research findings 
on type and team effectiveness (see "Research for Practi- 
tioners” at the end of this section). Is there a variety of 
type perspectives? If not, how can the team integrate 
those other perspectives into its work? 

m When disagreements or conflicts emerge, encourage 
team members to step back and ask themselves if type 
differences are playing a role. Even if they decide they 
are not, the mutual exploration can form the basis for 
dealing with the issues. 


Negotiating Working Agreements 


Traditionally, people in organizations worked within hierar- 
chical structures, responsible to a superior for getting “their 
job” completed. Working on teams can produce exciting 
synergies and collegial support; it also raises issues of loss of 
autonomy, accountability to colleagues, the requirement of 
frequent communication, and group problem solving. Ne- 
gotiating working agreements among team members is a 
crucial step in assisting people in learning to work together. 

Practitioners can use type in negotiating working agree- 
ments. The first step is to generate what each team member 
needs to be able to contribute his or her best work. 


Using Type Preference Dichotomies Negotiating 
agreements works well at the type preference level when the 
team is introduced to type: What do those who prefer Ex- 
traversion need to be able to make a contribution to this 
team? Those who prefer Introversion? And so on through 
all the preferences. 

The team can then proceed to negotiate around those 
identified needs. For example, a team can discuss how to 


Uses of Type in Organizations 349 





plan and conduct meetings to provide what both Extraverts 
and Introverts need and therefore get the best that each has 
to offer: 


B Do they need to allow more question and discussion 
time in the meetings so those who prefer Extraversion 
can process out loud? 

B How far ahead do they need to send out agendas so those 
who prefer Introversion have time to reflect before hav- 
ing to respond? 

B How can they ensure that those who prefer Introversion 
will have space in the meeting to share their thoughts? 


Teams with both Sensing and Intuitive types sometimes 
designate a time in meetings for each kind of information: 
"Now its time for Sensing information"; “now its time for 
Intuitive connections and patterns." This ensures that peo- 
ple with each preference have encouragement to participate 
and that the group will get both kinds of perspectives. 

The guiding value for the group is the constructive use 
of differences —the recognition that, for the team to get the 
benefit of what each member has to offer, it needs to allow 
time, space, and encouragement for the differences. 


Using Type Dynamics Exploring ways to work together 
effectively can go to even deeper levels by using dynamics 
and/or the four-letter type. An initial way of exploring 
differences is to ask team members, individually or with 
others of the same type, “How do you define team?” 
Typically, basic definitions of what a team is and does reveal 
very clear type-related differences: E and F types usually 
define teams in terms of interactions and communication; F 
types usually mention collegiality and support; T types 
typically focus on tasks, effectiveness, and efficiency; and so 
on. This activity can lead to very profitable discussions of 
team members' expectations of each other. 

Another activity that frequently produces valuable infor- 
mation for team members is asking individuals or team 
members of the same type to respond to questions such as 
the following: What does our type contribute to our team? 
What may our type overdo and overlook? What does our 
type need to do our best work? What annoys our type? 
After hearing from everyone on the team, members can 
explore what they can do to get the benefit of the contribu- 
tions and to help out in each others weaker areas. 


When Team Members Don't 
Give the "Right" Answers 


Practitioners sometimes worry that asking team members 
for such information by preference or by type may not 
produce the “right” answers; that is, they may not say 
what the research or type theory predicts they will say. 
There are a couple of ways to think about this that are 
reassuring. 

First, when people have had a good introduction to type 
and an opportunity to verify their own type preferences, 


they are almost always able to apply the information to 
describe themselves at work. When people have verified 
their type but state that they are different from the de- 
scription in a number of ways, it gives practitioners the 
opportunity to repeat a principle that needs repeating: 
Type does not explain everything. Every individual is 
unique, and while type may identify some underlying pat- 
terns, the ways in which those have been used and devel- 
oped vary widely from person to person. Though type pre- 
dicts group behavior (see Chapter 9 for a lot of evidence 
about this), it cannot confidently predict specific behav- 
iors of any individual in every situation. Practitioners will 
be true to type theory when they respond by saying some- 
thing like, “So this is the way you personally express your 
preference for Extraversion, and it sounds as though it's 
somewhat different from the ways others may express that 
same preference." 

Second, even if an individual gives information that 
doesn't relate to type, it does relate to that individual and 
therefore is valuable to team members. Types identification 
and affirmation of natural, normal differences among peo- 
ple often supports individuals in articulating individual 
needs. Team activities such as those described provide 
structure and encouragement for team members to ask for 
what they need—whether its type related or not. 


Making Decisions 


Few employees have been taught processes for making 
decisions as a group. The type decision-making model 
described in an earlier section of this chapter is very helpful 
for teams and can provide a structure for discussion and 
deciding. It can also be quickly expanded to provide a 
structure based on type preference: 


E: Share information and discuss. 
I: Reflect and then talk. 
S: Identify facts and realities. 
N: Generate possibilities. 
T: Analyze by likely outcomes. 
F: Evaluate by values and relationships. 
J: Make a plan. 
P: Be open to changing the plan. 
The ethic and perspective is the same as with othcr type dis- 


cussions: Decisions will be stronger if all the perspectives 
are included. 


Using a Team Type Analysis 


Psychological type describes individual personality, and this 
needs to be explicitly recognized when discussing “team 
type.” Used with this caution, however, analysis of team 
members’ types and the ways they may characterize the 
group can provide a valuable tool for analyzing where the 
team is effective and where it can improve. 


350 The Uses of Type 


Looking at preference distributions or at a team type 
table, for example, allows practitioners to raise questions 
about the internal working of the team: How do you deal 
with the Sensing-Intuition differences in the group? Do 
vour plans have enough flexibility for your Perceiving types? 

It can also lcad to profitable discussions about external 
rclationships—with supervisors or interacting with other 
teams: With our team prelerence for Introversion, do we 
give enough information, often enough, for those outside 
the team? 

The issue of team type similarity or diflerence is impor- 
tant to explore with the group. The research on type and 
tcams (sec "Research for Practitioners" in this section) indi- 
cates that teams consisting of individuals with similar com- 
munication styles work together more easily and may arrive 
at decisions more quickly. Teams with differing communi- 
cation styles take more time to make decisions but may pro- 
duce outcomes of better quality. 


Type Is Not an Appropriate Tool 
for Selection to Teams 


Neither the team nor practitioners should use MBTI results 
to select team members. This is because the MBTI was 
designed to assist people in identifying their psychological 
type preferences. It was not designed to indicate how well 
an individual uses preferences, the skills a person has devel- 
oped rclated to type preferences, or other skills related to 
nonpreferred arcas. 


The crucial question for the team and practitioner is, given our 
type distributions, how can we make the best use of each team 
member and our type knowledge to be as effective as possible? 





It is not unusual on small teams to find that members 
have a lot of type similarity and therefore may be missing 
some of the benefits of diverse perspectives. The question 
to pursue with teams with type similarity is, How can we 
include other perspectives? 

When team members have a lot of type differences, it 
may be reassuring to them to know that, if they can learn to 
use their differences, they can function very effectively. 


Other Team Relationship Issues 


The other primary team relationship issue practitioners are 
asked to address is building team spirit, and practitioners 
have a number of group development tools—unrelated to 
type—that contribute to this goal. Integrating the MBTI 
and type into team-building sessions can enhance the 
impact and value of these other activities as it affirms differ- 
ences in the ways people participate and respond. 

One type activity that can build knowledge and trust on 
teams is using Jungs developmental model to generate onc- 
on-one or group discussions: What function(s) have you 
been called on to use in the workplace? What kinds of feed- 
back from managers or peers have vou received about your 





use of these? When you think about using a different side of 
yourself, what concerns you? In development, it is impor- 
tant to be able to draw on all parts of oneself. Which MBTI 
functions present the greatest challenge to you as you think 
about using them? Introduction to Type Dynamics and Devel- 
opment (Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994) includes questions for 
exploring one’s own development, and with modification 
these can provide opportunities for team members to see 
each other in different ways, to expand their knowledge 
and understanding of each other, and to develop trust. 


Team Leaders 


Most teams have someone who is the coach or leader, and 
exploring the impact of the leaders type preferences is a valu- 
able team exercise. If leaders are comfortable with this 
approach, they can point out portions of their type descrip- 
tion that seem particularly important or characteristic of 
them. They can use their type description and that of other 
team members to discuss issues in communication, feedback, 
appreciation, and other topics of importance to the group. 


Resources 


Its important to start with Introduction to Type (Myers, with 
Kirby &amp; Myers, 1998) and individual type verification. The 
demands of the team and team tasks can influence the way 
people respond to the Indicator and their own self-estimate 
of their type, so its doubly important to focus on individual 
clarity about type first. 

Sandra Hirsh’s (1998) Introduction to Type and Teams is a 
useful booklet for working with teams. Hirsh’s (1992a, 
1992b) MBTI Team Building Program Leaders Resource 
Guide and Team Members Guide provide reproducible mas- 
ters and activities for teams. Topics include planning team- 
building sessions, analyzing a team using type, communica- 
tion styles, work environments, organizational change, 
organizational culture, and stress and type. 

Other resources mentioned earlier in this chapter also 
have specific sections on teams or information that can be 
used with teams: Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh 
&amp; Kummerow, 1998), WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, &amp; 
Kirby, 1997), and Work It Out (Hirsh &amp; Kise, 1996). 


Research for Practitioners 


Hammer and Huszczo (1996) summarized and analyzed 
extensive research on type and teams. This information is 
very useful to practitioners and will be interesting to most 
team members. The following is a brief summary of some of 
their conclusions, based on their analysis of the research. 


Conflict Styles Differences in preferred styles of dealing with 
contlict (see section in this chapter) are very relevant to team 
functioning and can be explored with excellent results. 


Extraversion-Introversion Several studies correlating 
FIRO-B results and CPI results with type preferences indicate 


Uses of Type in Organizations 351 


Table 13.13 Summary of Other Studies Using the Team as the Unit of Analysis 


Study 


Results 





Blaylock, 1983 


Webster &amp; Howard, 1989 
Scholl, 1975 


McCary, 1970 


Metts, 1995 


Diverse groups performed significantly better and more consistently than similar groups; 
no difference on perceptions of conflict or compatibility. 


Diversity positively correlated with performance. 


Diverse groups had lower quality of presentation on production task (grammatical, theoretical, and 
literary qualities of the written product), but better performance on a structured problem-solving 
task; regardless of task, similar groups took significantly less time; some evidence that outcomes are 
task dependent. 


No differences were found between similar and diverse groups on self-concept or trait anxiety; there 
was a curvilinear relationship (inverted U) between time and state anxiety for the diverse group. 


E-I, S-N, and J-P diversity and T—F similarity related to higher quality; diversity on J-P was associated with 
a number of outcome measures, while similarity on this dichotomy was associated with higher ratings on 
process variables; the set of four MBTI diversity measures was the best predictor of the teams’ own 


ratings of their overall quality; signs of regression coefficients indicated that the ratings of team quality 
were related primarily to similarity on the T-F dichotomy and diversity on the J-P dichotomy. 


Kandell, 199 | 


Diverse-type groups performed significantly better than similar-type groups; working as a group 


resulted in a “synergy” that increased performance over the sum of individuals’ performance; 
a significant interaction effect demonstrating that group synergy was greater for the diverse than 


for the similar groups. 
Futrell, 1992 


Correlations between heterogeneity and production and quality were low and nonsignificant; 


the partial correlation of J-P with production was significant. 


Brocato, 1985 


Type-similar teams worked more quickly than type-diverse teams; no differences in effectiveness 


on a structured task; on an ambiguous task, the product of the type-diverse teams was rated as 
being of significantly higher quality. 


HUNGIETENPENIO ONE AE GENE Luci Ea Ea es ee ee mem 


Source: From MBTI Applications: A Decade of Research on the Mycrs-Briggs Type Indicator (p 92), A L Hammer (Ed ), 19906. Palo Alto, CA. Consulting Psychologists Press. 


Copyright 1996 by Consulting Psychologists Press. Adapted with permission 


that the Extraversion—Introversion dichotomy is extremely 
important in understanding team interactions. Many of the 
values and behaviors identified in literature on teams as 
important to team funetioning correlate with Extraversion 
on the MBTI. Hammer and Huszezo ask if teams are fully 
utilizing Introversion. 


Similarity and Difference in Team Communication Styles 


Hammer and Huszezo reported results of several studies 
analyzing similarities and differences among team 
members. The studies that may be of most interest to team 
members and practitioners take the following approach: 
Using intact work teams, researchers determine the type of 
each individual on the team, compute a "similarity index," 
and then correlate the index with various measures of 
process and outcomes. 

For example, Hammer and Huszezo reported on studies 
using the Team Communication Adjustment Index (TCAD, à 
tool that identifies communication styles and is consistent 
with type theory. Their analysis and summary of these stud- 
ies is presented in Table 13.13. 

In brief, they found the following: 


Teams with similar communication styles 
B Perform their tasks more quickly 
B Experience less conflict 


B Like each other more 
B Listen to one another more 


Teams with diverse communication styles 
B Are more effective 

B Produce better outcomes 

B May take more time 


Team Leaders surveying the rescarch in this area, Hammer 
and Huszezo concluded that MBTI preferences were pre- 
dietors of values related to leader-member interactions and 
satisfaction: 


B Managers or leaders with MBTI preferences for E and F 
were generally rated higher on teamwork variables. 

@ Managers or leaders with NTP preferences, especially 
INTP. were found to value self-oriented individualism, a 
value that research on teams indicates interferes with 
teamwork. 

B Leaders who were different in type from the team, espe- 
cially on the Thinking-Fecling dichotomy, were rated by 
team members as more elfective than leaders who were 
the same as the team. 

B In a study of participative management, all types were 
able to learn the needed skills, but Feeling types were 
more able to use the participative leadership style. 


352 The Uses of Type 


Summary 


Because the MBTI focuses on seH-understanding, under- 
standing others, and appreciation of differences, it is a valu- 
able tool in working with teams. Integrating the MBTI into 
team interactions, agreements, communication, and deci- 
sion making provides a language and a structure for creat- 
ing teams that adds value for team members and for the 
organization. 


Using the MBTI in Leadership 
Development and Coaching 


Leadership development, management training, coaching 
executives—by whatever name, this is one of the fastest 
growing areas in organizational development activity. Con- 
sulting Psychology Journal (Kilburg, 1996) published a spe- 
cial edition on executive coaching; leadership institutes are 
presenting entire conferences focusing on executive coach- 
ing; large organizations such as the Center for Creative 
Lcadership have succeeded remarkably, focusing entirely on 
management and leadership development; and the question 
of effective leadership has produced a massive volume of 
literature. 

The analyses of effective leadership and recommenda- 
tions can be overwhelming to managers and leaders. This 
chapter will not survey the literature on leadership (for this, 
see Fitzgerald, 19972), but professionals who work in lead- 
ership development need to do so and find ways to make the 
information manageable and relevant to those with whom 
they work. Assuming the professionals expertise in leader- 
ship, this section focuses on appropriate and beneficial ways 
to use the MBTI! in leadership development activities. 


Use of the MBTI in Leadership Development 


According to Fitzgerald (1997b), “The Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (MBTI) has become a kcy resource in leadership 
development and is widely used in leadership development 
raining and executive coaching" (p. 311). One of the 
largest sources of data on managers, leaders, and leadership 
development is the Center for Creative Leadership, which 
has used the MBTI and psychological typc with its partici- 
pants in group and individual work since 1982. 

Fitzgerald (1997b) also pointed out the limitations of the 
ways the MBTI is used by most professionals in this area by 
defining “three levels of usc” (p. 311): level 1, which uses the 
type dichotomies; level 2, which introduces and uses type 
dynamics; and level 3, which uses the type development 
model. Type dynamics and development have been largely 
untapped in leadership development work and offer power- 
ful potentials for increasing leader effectiveness and growth. 

All of the earlicr sections in this chapter offer information 
that can be readily applied to using the MBTI in leadership 


development: improving communication, dealing with 
conflicts, enhancing problem solving and decision making, 
dealing with organizational change, managing stress, and 
using the MBTI with teams. Placed in the leadership con- 
text, these all provide valuable information for leaders and 
practical applications for prolessionals working with them. 
This chapter will focus primarily on what Fitzgerald terms 
levels 2 and 3: using type dynamics and development with 
leaders. 


Thinking—Judging Leadership Styles 


The overrepresentation of managers who prefer the combi- 
nation of Thinking and Judging on the MBTI is well docu- 
mented in a wide varicty of studies and in data from a wide 
variety of cultures (Reynierse, 1997; Fleenor, 1997; Kirby, 
1997; Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 1997b). Kirby suggested the fol- 
lowing explanation: 


The structure and values of organizations seein to have favored 
the logical and decisive behaviors most comfortable to those 
preferring Thinking and Judging, but that are less natural or 
comfortable to the three other comparable combinations of 
preferences—Feeling and Judging, Feeling and Perceiving, and 
Thinking and Perceiving. Because Thinking and Judging types 
are so prevalent in organizational leadership, it may be that 
Thinking and Judging behaviors have become the accepted defi- 
nition of what it means to lead, and, therefore, people displaying 
these behaviors are seen as “leadership material.” Other styles of 
leading may then not be seen as “leadership” because they do 
not fit the standard definition. (Kirby, 1997, p. 18) 


The Challenges This Presents Whatever the causes for this 


phenomenon, professionals working in leadership de- 
velopment will usually find themselves interacting with a 
majority of TJs. The challenge for practitioners is to 
understand and support the natural style and developed 
skills of T] leaders while assisting them in seeing the 
bencfits of modifying those skills and that style. 

The corollary to the preponderance of TJs in manage- 
ment is that managers with different combinations of prel- 
erences normally will have developed a number of skills 
and behaviors related to Thinking and Judging. With such 
TJ skills encouraged and supported by their environment, 
they may not have valued or developed their own natural 
style of leadership. According to type theory, people arc 
most effective when they have developed their own natural 
style and then learned to use nonprelferred areas as appro- 
priate. For some leaders who are not TJs, this development 
of their natural way of leading may not have occurred, as 
the organizational cultures in which they have worked and 
succeeded may not have supported such development. 


Thinking—Judging Strengths and Weaknesses as Leaders 
Research and practice (Barger &amp; Kirby, 19952) have iden- 
tified a number of components of TJ leadership style. lt is 
important to remember that these are characteristics of 
groups of TJs, and individual leaders with those preferences 
may vary on any number of these qualities and behaviors. 


Strengths in leadership associated with Thinking—Judging: 


W Focus on creating logical order and structures in the 
organization and its processes 

W Focus on achieving organizational goals 

B Use logical reasoning to quickly analyze problems 

B Are decisive—make decisions quickly and with confi- 
dence 

m Move to implement decisions quickly and with confi- 
dence 

B Emphasize efficiency 

m Value competence, set high standards lor themselves and 
others 


They may give less attention and energy to, and therefore be 
less skilled in, some other behaviors that contribute to 
effective managing and leading. 

Weaknesses in leadership associated with Thinking- 


Judging: 


m Creating logical structures that unintentionally limit 
others’ flexibility, creativity, and perspectives 

B Emphasizing efficiency over inclusion and consultation— 
failing to involve others in analysis and decision making 

B Moving so quickly to decisions that they dont allow the 
amount of process time others need 

W Being so decisive and confident that they make decisions 
before they have gathered enough information 

B Focusing so strongly on achieving goals that they refuse 
to reopen decisions based on new information 

B Placing such value on their own high standards that they 
fail to recognize alternative standards and positive con- 
tributions from others that are different from theirs 


Fortunately, much of the current leadership literature 
includes recognition of the need to develop some of the 
behaviors that are not naturally part of the TJ style, and 
many organizational development programs identify skills 
more naturally related to Feeling and Perceiving prefer- 
ences as necessary for effective leadership in changing orga- 
nizations. Thinking-Judging leaders highly value being 
competent and effective. Using the MBTI allows practition- 
ers to alfirm their competence and effectiveness while help- 
ing them identify areas where they can improve. 


Emphasizing Process, Inclusion, and Flexibility One of the 
hardest tasks for Thinking managers, especially those who 
combine Thinking with Extraversion, is recognizing the 
process and inclusion needs of others and finding ways to 
support those. Using type can help identify others' needs for 
process and inclusion. Thinking types will be particularly 
receptive to this information if it comes from a respected 
colleague, someone whose leadership abilities they 
recognize and who can express these needs in terms of his 
or her own natural style. 

Another effective vehicle for communicating these needs 
to leaders is using other instruments to provide practical, 


353 


Uses of Type in Organizations 





specific feedback about their style and its impacts. A varicty 
of 360-degree feedback instruments can serve this purpose 
(Van Velsor &amp; Fleenor, 1997; Fleenor, 1997), giving leaders 
specific information related to their effectiveness or lack of 
effectiveness. Practitioners can also make use of informa- 
tion from the Leadership Styles Inventory (LSD and the CPI 
(Pearman &amp; Fleenor, 1996; Fleenor, 1997), and Systematic 
Multiple-Level Observation of Groups (SYMLOG; Sundstrom 
&amp; Busby, 1997) in identifying common strengths and weak- 
nesses in leadership by type. 

The information provided by looking at other instru- 
ments enables practitioners to appreciate some of the 
nuances that make whole dynamic types different from one 
another. For example, Table 13.14 presents type data in rela- 
tion to the 20 CPI Folk Concept Scales. The table shows the 
types whose mean score was significantly higher or lower 
than the total sample mean on each scale. Because the sam- 
ple size was large (15,102 participants in Center for Creative 
Leadership training programs), only mean differences signif- 
icant at p « .001 are shown. In interpreting these data, it is 
important to bear in mind that scores on the CPI scales for 
all types represent variations within the normal range of each 
scale. The meaning of high and low scores is shown in the 
table to discourage misunderstanding of some of the scale 
names. Note, for example, that although a number of scales 
seem to dilferentiate between types preferring Extraversion 
and thosc preferring Introversion, there are Extraverted and 
Introverted types that dont appear with the other types with 
the same attitude. One can thus explore some of the subtle 
differences in the way a persons whole type differently 
alfects the behavior encompassed by a particular CPI scale. 
Note that these same CPI data are presented for each type in 
Chapter +, Tables 4.26—4.41, and are also discussed in Chap- 
ter 9 as evidence of the validity of whole type. 

Research from the national sample correlating the Emo- 
tion Quotient Inventory (ECH) with MBTI results may also 
provide useful feedback. The small sample size (N = 139) 
supported only a correlational analysis in relation to the 
four dichotomies. Results are reported below. 


B Extraversion was found to correlate (p values significant 
at «.001) with the following EQI scales: 
Assertiveness 
Emotionality 
Empathy 
Flexibility 
Happiness 
Interpersonal Relations 
Optimism 
Self-Actualization 
Sclf-Regulation 
Total Adaptability 
Total Emotion Quotient Index 
General Mood 
Total Interpersonal 
Total Stress Management 


354 


The Uses of Type 


Table 13.14 Higher and Lower Scoring Types on the 20 Folk Concept Scales of the CPI 


Kind of Measure, Scale Name, Meaning of Higher and Lower Scores 


Poise, Self-Assurance, Interpersanal Proclivities Scales 


Dominance (Do) 


Capacity for Status (Cs) 


Sociability (Sy) 


Social Presence (Sp) 


Self-Acceptance (Sa) 


Independence (In) 


Empathy (Em) 


——————— 


Higher: 
Lower: 


Higher: 
Lower: 


Higher: 
Lawer: 


Higher: 
Lower: 


Higher: 


Lower: 


Higher: 


Lower: 


Higher: 


Lower: 


——— P P—— 


confident, assertive, dominant, task oriented 
cautious, quiet, hesitant to take initiative 


ambitious, wants to be success, many interests 
unsure of self, dislikes direct competition, uncomfortable with 
uncertainty or complexity 


sociable, likes to be with people, outgoing 
shy, often inhibited, prefers to stay in background in social situations 


self-assured, spontaneous, versatile, verbally fluent, pleasure-seeking 
reserved, hesitant to express own views, self-denying 


has good opinion of self, sees self as talented, personally 
attractive, talkative 

self-doubting, readily assumes blame, often thinks others are better, 
gives in easily 


self-sufficient, resourceful, detached, persistent to goals regardless of 
others' agreement 

lacks self-confidence, seeks support, tries to avoid conflict, difficulty 
making decisions 


comfortable about self, well accepted by others, perceptive of 
social nuances and others' feelings, optimistic 

unempathetic, skeptical about others' intentions, defensive, limited 
range of interests 


CRT ORAE ERE E OEE ZU App ^p ntque "rtg 077 ar 





Narmative Orientation and Values Scales 


Responsibility (Re) 


Socialization (So) 


Self- Control (Sc) 


Good Impression (Gi) 


Communality (Cm) 


Higher: 
Lower: 
Higher: 


Lawer: 


Higher: 


Lower: 


Higher: 


Lawer: 


Higher: 


Lower: 


responsible, reliable, ethically perceptive, serious about duties 
and obligations 


self-indulgent, undisciplined, careless, indifferent to personal obligations 


conscientious, well-organized, easily conforms to rules, seldom gets 
in trouble 

resists rules, dislikes conforming, rebellious, gets in trouble, has 
unconventional views 


tries to control emotions and temper, suppresses hostile and erotic 
feelings, prides self on self-discipline 

has strong feelings and emotions and makes little effort co hide them, 
problems with undercontrol and impulsivity, likes new experiences 


wants to make good impression, tries to please, is conventional, 
formal, and conservative 

insists on being self even if causes friction, dissatisfied in many 
situations, often complains, easily annoyed and irritated 


fits in easily, reasonable, sees self as average person, makes little 
effort to change things 

sees self as different, not conventional or conforming, changeable 
and moody 


=% ae CRT Dee 


TL a A a LR LTT 


High Types 


ESTP. ENFP: 
ENTP: EST]: 
ENF}; ENT) 


ENFP; ENTP; 
ENF; ENT) 


ESTP: ESFP; ENFP. 
ENTP. EST]; ESF}: 
ENFJ; ENT| 


ESTP; ENFP. 
ENTP; EST]: 
ENF]; ENT] 


ESTP; ENFP; 
ENTP; EST}; 
ENF}; ENT) 


INTP; ENFP; 
ENTP 


ENFP; ENTP; 
ENFJ; ENT) 


INTJ; ENF); ENT) 


IST}; ESF}; ENT) 


IST] 


ESTJ; ENF]; ENT) 


IST]; EST}: ESF] 


Low Types 


IST]: ISFJ: INF); 
INT: ISTIS: 
INFP; INTP 


IST}; ISF}; ISTP; 
ISFP 


IST]; ISF); INF}: 
INTJ; ISTP; 
ISFP; INFP;INTP 


IST); ISFJ; INF); 
INT}; ISTP; ISFP; 
INFP 


ISFJ; INFJ; INT]; 
ISTP: ISFP; INFP; 
INTP 


IST); ISF); INF]; 
ISTP; ISFP; ESF} 


ISTJ; ISF); INT); 
ISTP; ISFP 





ISTP: ISFP; INTP; 
ESTP: ENTE 


ENFP; ENTP 


INFP; ISTP; ESFP; 
ENFP; ENTP 


INFJ; INTJ; ISTP; 
ISFP; INFP; INTP; 
ENFP 


INFP; INTP; 
ENFP; ENTP 


a) 





Uses of Type in Organizations 





D3o 





Table 13.14 Higher and Lower Scoring Types on the 20 Folk Concept Scales of the CPI continued 


Kind of Measure, Scale Name, Meaning of Higher and Lower Scores 





Normotive Orientation ond Values Scales 


tolerant of others' beliefs and values even when different from own, 


Well-being (VVb) Higher: feels self in good physical and mental health, optimistic about 
future, cheerful 
Lower: concerned about health or personal problems, tends to complain 
about unfair treatment or is pessimistic 
Tolerance (To) Higher: 
fair-minded, reasonable, tactful 
Lower: 


= eue e SE ce te 


feelings 


distrustful, fault-finding, extrapunitive, often has hostile or vindictive 


Cognitive ond Intellectual Functioning Scales 


Achievement via Higher: has strong will to do well, likes working in setting with clear definitions 
Conformance (Ac) of tasks and expectations, efficient, well-organized 
Lower: difficulty working in setting with strict rules and regulations, easily 
distracted, tends to stop working when things do not go well 
Achievement via Higher: has strong drive to do well, likes working in settings that encourage 
Independence (Ai) freedom and individual initiative, clear thinking, intelligent 
Lower: has difficulty doing best work in vague and poorly defined settings 
that lack precise specifications, limited interests in intellectual/ 
cognitive endeavors 
Intellectual Higher: efficient in use of intellectual abilities, keeps on task where others 
Efficiency (le) might give up, insightful, resourceful 
Lower: has hard time starting on cognitive tasks and seeing through to 





— 


Role and Personol Style Scoles 


completion, has difficulty expressing ideas 


Psychological- Higher: insightful, perceptive, understands others’ feelings but not necessarily 
Mindedness (Py) supportive, nurturant 
Lower: more interested in the practical and concrete than abstract, 
attends more to what people do than how they think or feel 
Flexibility (Fx) Higher: flexible;likes change and variety; easily bored by routine, everyday 
experience; may be impatient, clever, imaginative 
Lower: not changeable;likes steady pace and well-organized, predictable 
situations; conventional and conservative 
Femininity/ Higher: among males, seen as high-strung, sensitive, esthetically reactive; 
Masculinity (F/M) females seen as sympathetic, warm, modest, dependent 
Lower: decisive, action-oriented, shows initiative, not easily subdued, 


unsentimental, tough-minded 


High Types 


EST); ENT) 


ENFP: ENTP: 
EST}; ENT) 


INTJ; EST); ESF}; 
ENT) 


INF]; INT}; INFP: 


INTP; ENFP; ENTP; 


ENFJ; ENT} 


INTJ;INTP; ENFP; 
ENTP; ENF]; ENT) 


INTJ; INTP; ENF); 
ENT) 


INFP; INTP; ESTP; 
ENFP; ENTP; 
ENFJ; ENT] 


ISTJ; ISF}; INF]; 
INT); ISFP; INFP; 
ESF] 


Low Types 


ISTJ; ISF); INF}; 
ISTE ISFF: 
INFP; INTP 


IST); ISF); ISTP; 
ISEP:ESTP 


ISTP, ISFP; 
INFP;INTP; 
ESTP ESER: 
ENFP; ENTP 


1S0): ISEISIST P: 
ISEPPESTP: 
EST]; ESF] 


IST); ISF); ISTP; 
ISFP; ESTP; 
ESTI ESF 


IST); ISF); ISTP; 
ISFP; ESTP: 
ESFP; EST]; 
ESF} 


IST}: ISF]; EST]; 
ESF) 


ENTP; EST]; 
ENT] 


os Se EP a ee ee ee ae ee OM eU MULOOYOTAXT VRCCUOOTILY37 — 


Note: Types shown had means that were significantly higher or lower than the sample mean at p &lt; .0O1. Means for all types fall within the normal range. 


Source: From “The Relanonship Between the MBTI and Measures of Personality and Performance m Management Groups,” by} W Fleenor, 1997, in Developing Leaders, p. 126 
Palo Alto, CA. Davies- Black. Copyright 1997 by Davies-Black. Adapted with permission 


w No EQI scales were correlated with the MBTI S-N 


dichotomy. 


w Assertiveness (p « .003) , Independence (p « .005), Stress 


m Impulse Control (p &lt; .003), Problem Solving (p « .002), 


Reality Testing (p « .007), and Total Stress Management 


Management (p &lt; .040), and Total Adaptability (p &lt; .054) 


(p « .030) were correlated with Judging. 


The need for added flexibility, for rethinking decisions 


were correlated with Thinking. 

m Empathy (p &lt; .001), Interpersonal (p « .009), Problem 
Solving (p « .044), Social Responsibility (p « .000) and 
Total Interpersonal (p « .000) were correlated with Feeling, 


and making midcourse corrections, and for learning to 
operate without fixed structures can be amply illustrated 
through any of the literature on organizational change. This 


356 The Uses of Type 





recognition will be most effective if Thinking-Judging types 
can be led to reflect on some of their own decisions that 
produced unanticipated results and to analyze how the 
results might have been positively affected by having more 
llexible and changeable plans. 

Once these needs are recognized, Thinking types want 
logical explanations and practical information about how to 
develop new skills. Within this context they will respond 
quickly to learn active listening, ways to acknowledge the 
contributions of others, how to give positive feedback, and 
SO on. 

lts important to emphasize with clients that these new 
skills will add positive dimensions to skills already devel- 
oped, not change them into a different kind of person, and 
that they need to continue to be authentic in their leadership. 


Other Leadership Styles 


Similar steps can be followed in working with TP, FJ, and 
FP leaders. In these cases, professionals may also want to 
explore where and how these leaders have been able to 
develop their own natural strengths. If these strengths 
have not been supported, working together to identify 
their benefits to the organization and avenues for using 
them can be very profitable in the leaders’ development 
and confidence. 


Coaching Individuals 


All of the information above can be used in coaching indi- 
viduals. One effective approach is to use this information 
carly on in the coaching relationship, as part of building the 
trust necessary for effective coaching. Professionals can 
lead clients through a process of identifying client leader- 
ship strengths related to type and then can work with the 
client to examine differences between that and the profes- 
sionals own type-related strengths. Coach and client can 
then negotiate around their differences using questions 
such as these: What is important to you in our relation- 
ship? What behaviors on my part will respect and honor 
what's important to you? Which of my strengths would 
you like to know more about? Will you help me learn 
more about some of your specific strengths? The process 
must of course remain focused on the client, rather than 
the practitioner. 

Using this approach encourages a climate of mutual 
respect and trust while assisting leaders in analyzing their 
own style. It also models appreciation and negotiation of 
differences, valuable components of leadership. 


Using Type Dynamics 

Using the TJ, TP. FJ, and FP combinations in the beginning 
with leaders is very effective: The applications and the value 
ol the information and process are readily apparent. Because 


these combinations include the J-P dichotomy, this approach 
leads naturally into explaining type dynamics (sce the earlier 
section in this chapter "Introducing and Using the Dynamic 
and Developmental Aspects of Type”). 

Using type dynamics with leaders provides the following 
benefits (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 1997a): 


l. It clarifies the relationship between a leaders inner pro- 
cessing and outward functioning. Because leaders must 
operate so much in the Extraverted world, they, as well 
as their followers, may fail to recognize and appreci- 
ate their Introverted parts. This can be particularly 
important for leaders who prefer Introversion and 
therefore use their dominant function internally, but 
its also important for those who prefer Extraversion. 

For example, ENT] leaders may customarily interact 
with colleagues and subordinates in ways appropriate 
and consistent with their dominant extraverted Think- 
ing. They may fail to make others aware of their inter- 
nal Intuitive processing and give others the impression 
that they are “all judgment,” no information. 

2. It provides a basis for analyzing the relationship between 
a leaders perception and judgment. Which function is 
dominant? Is the auxiliary function well developed? 
Does it provide the balance that will produce the 
most effective leadership? 

For example, EST] leaders may recognize that 
their drive for achieving goals efficiently may some- 
times lead them to spend too little time consulting 
their introverted Sensing auxiliary—especially in fast- 
paced environments requiring quick decisions and 
actions. 

3. It can inerease leaders’ sclf-understanding and their 
rccognition of the impacts they have on their followers. 
For example, INFP Jeaders can recognize that their 
most important part—their central core of values 
by which they evaluate everything—seldom gets 
expressed as they use their auxiliary extraverted Intu- 
ition to perform effectively as a leader. The part that is 
most important to INFPs—their introverted Feeling— 
is often not known to followers, who can find the 
leader difficult to understand and feel puzzled about 
how to meet the leaders expectations. This recogni- 
tion can lead to explorations of ways INFPs can com- 
municate these personal values effectively to those 
they lead. 

4. It suggcsts specific target arcas for developing additional 
leadership skills and some stratcgies for beginning. For 
example, ISTJ leaders may recognize and appreciate 
the leadership skills exhibited by those who naturally 
extravert Fecling judgment. Examination of common 
characteristics of Extraverted Feeling types can pro- 
vide practical goals for ISTJ development. 

5. It gives a structure for understanding some of the 
impacts of stress on leadcrship stylc. For example, 


ENF] leaders may recognize that, under stress, they 
tend to exaggerate their dominant extraverted Feel- 
ing to the point of great annoyance to others (sec sec- 
tion “Managing Stress" earlier in this chapter). They 
may focus on finding consensus and harmony when 
its time to move on and may be intrusive in their 
insistence on “helping” others. Recognizing these 
stress-related behaviors is the first step in learning to 
deal more effectively with the stresses faced hy all 
leaders. 


Using Type Development with Leaders 


Type development adds another dimension to leadership 
development, offering rewards in personal understanding 
and development as well as growth as a leader. Jungs 
developmental model, described in Chapter 3 of this man- 
ual, can be communicated quickly to leaders and then 
offers the following opportunities for leadership and per- 
sonal development: 


m Analyzing development of the dominant and auxiliary 
functions: How have individuals used these preferred 
areas? Where in their work and personal life have they 
found encouragement and support for their develop- 
ment and use? Can they identify areas in their current 
and future work life where they ean effeetively apply 
these? 

m Evaluating their balance—between Extraversion and 
Iniroversion and between perception and judgment: 
Have they developed effective ways of being in the world 
and drawing on inner resources? Do they have reliable, 
trustworthy ways of taking in information and of mak- 
ing decisions? Has the press of family, culture, work, or 
other environmental factors led to a lack of development 
in one of their preferred areas? 

m Exploring the possibilities of midlife development: What 
is midlife? How do different types experience it? What 
issues does it present for leaders? What opportunities 
does it open up? 

m Discussing maturity and wisdom: What does it mean to 
have mature judgment? Who have you known whom 
you considered wise? What characteristics do you asso- 
ciate with that? What positive qualities are described by 
Jungs concept of individuation? How can you move 
toward those qualities? 


Perhaps because so many leaders in organizations in the 
1990s are in some stage of midlife, exploring these kinds of 
issues leads to exciting discoveries. It can also be reassuring 
to those who have been struggling to understand their own 
changes in interest and energy. The developmental model 
assists them in seeing that these are not puzzling individual 
weaknesses or confusing symptoms but instead a natural 
development that ean produce beneficial results. 


357 


Uses of Type in Organizations 








Guidelines for Using Type Dynamics 
and Development with Leaders 


Fitzgerald (1997b) and Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby (1997a) offer 
suggestions for using dynamics and development in leader- 
ship development and executive coaching. The following is 
a brief summary: 


m Analyze the impact of the function that is extraverted. 
For example, leaders who extravert Thinking may need 
to hear the impact their logical dissection of problems 
can have on others and explore ways to provide more 
positive feedback. 

m Analyze the impact of the function that is introverted. 
For example, leaders who introvert their perceiving 
function may want to learn how to give others the 
information they have inside that has guided their 
Extraverted decisions. 

@ Explore the relative emphasis on perception versus judg- 
ment. For example, leaders who prefer Judging may 
want to develop ways to feel comfortable putting off 
decisions while more information is gathered; those who 
prefer Perceiving may need to develop comfort in some- 
times making decisions without perfect information. 

m Explore the relative emphasis on the outer world, 
extraverting, versus the inner world, introverting. For 
example, leaders may find that the fast pace and de- 
mands of their environment have resulted in their not 
giving their Introverted part an opportunity to play a 
role. Whether that is their perceiving function or their 
judging function, they will be missing some of their own 
important strengths if they have not found time and 
space for their Introversion to play a role. 

m Contrast leaders’ type dynamics with those of colleagues 
or subordinates. For example, exploring what each 
extraverts and introverts can illuminate long-standing 
misunderstandings and provide new ways for them to 
connect. 

gm Explore the impacts of leaders tertiary and inferior func- 
tions. For example, have Sensing leaders learned to use 
and trust their Intuition when that is appropriate? Have 
Thinking leaders learned to listen to their Fecling? 

Ææ Give opportunities to discuss leaders’ inferior functions, 
especially ways in which it may function as their 
Achilles heel. For example, are there some things they 
always overlook? Are there some areas where they never 
seem to learn from experience? 

m Discuss emergence of the nonpreferred functions at 
midlife and beyond. For example, for a dominant 
extraverted Intuitive, what does emerging introverted 
Sensing look like? 

m Analyze leaders’ environments and demands in terms of 
current and potential use of their strengths and opportu- 
nities for development. For example, can a dominant 


358 The Uses of Type 


Feeling type find areas at work to contribute. the 
strengths of that function? 


jungs concept of lifelong growth is extremely appealing 
to clients. For many, it opens up exciting opportunities per- 
sonally and professionally. Fitzgerald chapter (1997b) on 
using type development with leaders is subtitled “Integrat- 
ing Reality and Vision, Mind and Heart.” The subtitle de- 
scribes what leaders need to be more effective. 


Resources 


The recommended resource lor introducing type is Intro- 
duction to Type (Myers, with Kirby &amp; Myers, 1998). Using 
this booklet keeps the initial focus where it needs to be: 
identifying leaders’ type apart from their work and the roles 
they play. Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; 
Kummerow, 1998) provides type descriptions that relate 
specifically to work and include each types normal leader- 
ship style. Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development 
(Myers &amp; Kirby, 1994) provides the basis for using dynam- 
ies and development with leaders, including information 
that will be helpful in all the suggested applications above. 

Hardwired Leadership (Pearman, 1998) provides insights 
into personality style and shows how to enhance your lead- 
ership style to increase personal and work effectiveness and 
transform group efforts into meaningful results. 

Developing Leaders (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 1997b) includes 
an introduction to the MBTI and discussion of the impacts of 
MBTI types of leaders (Chapter 1); an analysis of the MBTI 
and leadership development, including a survey of the litera- 
ture on leadership (Chapter 2); a chapter on using type 
dynamics with leaders and another on using type develop- 
ment; and seven specific applications chapters, including 
using the MBTI with management simulations, using the 
MBTI Step IE with managers, ST]s and organizational change, 
and strategies for improving leaders’ communication. 

WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, &amp; Kirby, 1997) includes 
a chapter on leadership that examines TJ, TP, FJ, and FP 
leadership styles and offers advice for leaders on improving 
decision making. Barr and Barr (1994) integrate the MBTI 
into their Leadership Development: Maturity and Power, pro- 
viding descriptions, analysis, and development activities. 


Research for Practitioners 


The research literature on the MBTI and managemenvlead- 
ership is extensive and can be overwhelming—to practi- 
tioners as well as their clients. Walck has published three 
surveys and analyses of research in this area: "Psychologi- 
cal Type and Management Research: A Review” (1992); 
"Management and Leadership" (1996); and "Using the 
MBTI in Management and Leadership: A Review of the Lit- 
craturc" (1997). Each of these has extensive references to 
literature anc will provide a useful starting point for practi- 
tioners to identify researeh findings that will be relevant in 
their work. 


Using the MBTI with Other Instruments Most leadership 
development prograins and coaching interactions involve use 
of more than one instrument for providing feedback to 
leaders. This is appropriate: Different instruments are de- 
signed to identify a variety of characteristics and behaviors 
important to leaders, and use of instruments looking at 
different aspects adds value for leaders. 

It is important for professionals to assist leaders in inte- 
grating this information (Fleenor, 1997). In using the MBTI 
with other instruments, practitioners need to explore 
research studies relating the MBTI to those other instru- 
ments and be prepared to give concise information to 
clients that will assist them in making use of the infor- 
mation, rather than being overwhelmed by sometimes 
conflicting data. Developing Leaders (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 
1997b) includes six chapters reporting research using the 
MBTI with leaders, including the relationship between the 
MBTI and several 360-degree feedback instruments and 
other measures of leadership. 1t also includes a model for 
using two instruments together in Schnel] and Hammer, 
"Integrating the FIRO-B with the MBTI: Relationships, 
Case Examples, and Interpretation Strategies." The Journal 
of Psychological Iype is the other primary source for reports 
ol studies on the MBTI and other instruments. Practitioners 
are urged to consult these resources to assist their use of the 
MBTI with other instruments, as well as to expand their 
understanding of common effects of the MBTI preferences 
in management styles and behaviors. 


Using Type in Analyzing 
Organizations 


Psychological type describes individual personality struc- 
tures; therefore application of type categories to groups 
such as teams, organizations, and cultures must always pro- 
ceed with caution, and practitioners cannot assume that 
knowledge of a particular types dynamics can be trans- 
ferred directly to the dynamics of groups. 

With that caveat, type can play a useful part in analyzing 
organizations and providing valuable information about orga- 
nizational culture and presses on individuals in the organiza- 
tional environment. The concept of environmental press 
(Brehm &amp; Kassin, 1993) states that, at some point, groups 
have enough uniform behaviors, attitudes, and values that 
group members are expected to conform. Applied to organi- 
zations, it is similar to the more familiar concept of organiza- 
tional cultures that, like other cultures, identify appropriate 
behavior, manners, dress, values, and so on. 


Analyzing Organizational Character 


William Bridges (1992a) developed an approach to analyz- 
ing the “character of organizations" using Jungian type cat- 
egories and the type dichotomies of the MBTI. He is careful 





to point out that simply adding together the number of peo- 
ple with eaeh type preference to determine whieh are in the 
majority does not indicate an organizations character (a 
position supported by comparing type distributions in 
national samples to analvses of cultural values). Instead, he 
describes organizational values and behavior related 10 each 
of the preferences. Extraverted organizations, for example, 
are oriented to the market, allow access to decision making, 
and act quickly, whereas Introverted organizations are ori- 
ented toward their internal culture and technology, restrict 
access to decision making, and respond only after careful 
study. Bridges also describes the 16 types of “organizational 
character" and then examines how organizational character 
affects the ways in which organizations respond to change, 
growth, and development. 

Groups or individuals who have becn introduced to type 
usually enjoy and are quick to use type understanding to 
characterize their organization, though they may have trou- 
ble agreeing on one or more of the preferences. Practition- 
ers can take advantage of these spontaneous connections 
clients make by structuring an activity analyzing the organi- 
zations character. Groups can then identify what opportuni- 
ties the organization may be missing, difficulties the organi- 
zation may experience, and so on. They can also profitably 
discuss the ways the character of the organization may affect 
employees, especially those who have type preferences differ- 
ent from those supported by organizational values and 
behavior. 


Analyzing Organizational Type Distributions 


A different, but related, use of type for organizational analy- 
sis involves collecting data about type distributions in dif- 
ferent functions or levels of the organization. Though indi- 
vidual type results cannot be shared, grouped data such as 
type distributions can, with clients’ permission, be used to 
create type tables of different functions. This information 
can then be used in a variety of ways to help the organiza- 
tion and individuals within it. 

For example, Barger (personal communication, 1995) 
reported using the MBTI with a company that designed, built, 
and sold houses. Serious conflicts arose between the sales 
agents and the construction crews, and Barger was asked to 
negotiate what had become an explosive situation. Because 
she had used the MBTI with both groups, she was able to 
identify significant type differences: The sales agents were pri- 
marily ENPs and had identified their work in those terms. 
The construction supervisors were predominantly ISTJs and 
had related those type preferences to their group. As in the 
example earlier in this chapter, in “Using Type as a Bridge in 
Dealing with Other Conflicts,” beginning with analysis of 
group type differences immediately depersonalized a number 
of the hottest issues and created a climate in the groups that 
allowed them to negouate other important issues. 

Pearman (1993) reported another use of type distribu- 
tion information that can be very helpful to organizations: 


Uses of Type in Organizauons 359 


comparing type distributions of different levels. In working 
with supervisors, managers, and executives of a multi- 
national manufacturing organization, Pearman collected 
type data about each group and a group designated by the 
companv as "future managers." He used self-selection ratios 
to determine types that were over- and underrepresented in 
higher levels of management, compared to their presence in 
the lower-level groups. The primary type-related pattern he 
found indicated that Intuitive types were significantly more 
likely to be promoted to higher levels of responsibility than 
were Sensing types. Pearman presented his analysis to the 
execulive management group and led them through an 
examination and revision of hiring and promotion policies 
and practices. 


Resources 


Bridges’ (1992a) The Character of Organizations is the only 
thorough attempt to apply MBTI type to organizations. Ryt- 
ting, Ware, and Prince (1994) reported a study of 348 suc- 
cessful moderate-size companies in the service sector, about 
half of which were family owned. They compared data on 
the MBTI type of the chief executive officer of a company 
and the company’s “character” using Bridges (19922) Orga- 
nizational Character Index. The most significant relation- 
ship they found was that companies headed by types that 
extravert their Thinking process were rated as more 
Extraverted than companies whose leaders introvert their 
Thinking process. These relationships were independent of 
whether CEOs preferred Extraversion or Introversion, lead- 
ing the authors to conclude that introversion of the Think- 
ing process may lead employees to feel excluded from deci- 
sion making. 

Reynierse (1993, 1997), Reynierse and Harker (1995), 
and Oswick and Mahoney (1993) provide various kinds of 
analysis of type distributions at different levels of organiza- 
tional leadership. Their studies can guide practitioners who 
wish to use this approach to assist organizations in examin- 
ing their hiring and promotion practices. 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Organizations 


Chapters 5 and 6 in this manual provide general guidelines 
for administering and interpreting the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator personality inventory. Professionals using the 
MBTI in organizations need to develop policies and proce- 
dures to ensure that those guidelines will be followed by the 
organizations with which they are working. This includes 
anticipating potential problems created by organizational 
cultures and practiees in general, as well as identifying fac- 
tors within specific organizations that could affect working 
within the guidelines. 


360 The Uses of Type 


This section addresses issues that commonly arise in 
rclationship to administering and interpreting the MBTI in 
organizations and offers solutions experienced practitioners 
have developed to respond to those concerns. 


Questions About Administering the MBTI 


The questions in this section deal with three essential 
guidelines for practitioners administering the MBTI in orga- 
nizational settings: 


W Respondents to the Indicator must know the purpose for 
which the MBTI is being used. 

B Completing the Indicator must be voluntary. 

W Results are confidential and belong to the individual. 


Practitioners can develop clear policies and practices to 
ensure that each of these guidelines is understood and fol- 
lowed by organizational clients. 


l. What are valid uses for the MBTI in organizational 
settings? 
Type information should be used to enhance individ- 
ual and group satisfaction rather than to restrict or 
limit individual or group functioning. This chapter has 
outlined a number of appropriate organizational uses of 
the Indicator: increasing self-understanding, enhancing 
group interactions, improving individual and group 
cffectiveness at work, and providing an ethical context 
and tools for dealing with identified problems. 

People in organizations contracting for adminis- 
tration and interpretation of the MBTI sometimes 
plan to use the results in inappropriate ways, usually 
because they misunderstand the meaning of psycho- 
logical type and the correct interpretation of MBTI 
results. This confusion arises because they arc famil- 
iar with trait measures, which give information about 
peoples skills, knowledge, or behaviors—for exam- 
ple, the Management Skills Profile, the FIRO-B, the 
California Psychological Inventory, the Kirton Adapta- 
tion Innovation Inventory, and so on. Trait measures 
vield results that allow organizations to assess an 
individuals skills, performance, and behaviors in spe- 
cific areas. Insofar as the traits measured relate di- 
rectly to the job and the instrument used is reliable 
and valid, results may be appropriate indicators of an 
individual's suitability for hiring, promotion, or selee- 
tion for particular jobs and teams. 





The MBTI is not a measure of traits; MBTI results do 
not indicate intelligence, knowledge, or skills. 





The MBTI is a type-sorting instrument designed to 
indicate underlying patterns in personalities. When 
research is conducted on groups who share one or 
more preferences, there are frequently correlations 
with specific scales on trait measures; this indicates 


P 


that, for many people, acting on their type prefer- 
ences leads to predictable patterns in behavior, val- 
ues, and motivations. Such research does not indicate 
whether individuals in these type groups use thc 
bchaviors with skill, whether their values are fully 
considered and consciously direct their actions, 
whether they are well-developed individuals, or 
whether they enjoy performing certain activities. And 
the research groups data that may or may not apply to 
specific individuals. 


It is inappropriate to use the MBTI for hiring, promo- 
tion, or selection. Results on the Indicator simply do not 
give information that will be helpful in these functions. 





lf a manager or group needs a person with well- 
developed skills that frequently relate to a particular 
MBTI preference, they need to use in their decision 
making past performance with similar tasks or trait 
measures that indicate whether individuals have 
those skills and use them well. Deciding that a certain 
position requires a Sensing type, for example, and 
selecting a person who reports Sensing on the MBTI 
for that position is unfair to Intuitive individuals who 
have developed Sensing skills and is liable to result in 
disappointing results for the manager and group. 

Practitioners nced to be clear about the meaning of 
MBTI results and be able to identify appropriate and 
inappropriate uses confidently. Chapters 1, 2, and 3 
in this manual discuss the differences between results 
on trait measures and type-sorting instruments more 
fully and can assist practitioners in developing their 
own knowledge and confidence. If they have addi- 
tional questions, practitioners can consult the pub- 
lisher of the MBTI or the ethical guidelines of profes- 
sional organizations such as the Association for 
Psychological Type, the American Counseling Associ- 
ation, the American Psychological Association, or 
other groups concerned with appropriate uses of psy- 
chological instruments. 

Experienced MBTI practitioners have found it 
helpful not only to clarify these issues with organiza- 
tional clients but also to include in a letter of agree- 
ment their understanding of the purposes for using 
the MBTI. This section includes suggested contents 
for a letter of agreement that can help practitioners 
ensure their clients usc MBTI results appropriately. 


. How can an organization ensure that individnals are 


taking the MBTI voluntarily? 

This can be a difficult issue in organizations. 1n addi- 
tion to simply communicating the requirement, prac- 
titioners need to find ways to implement it when a 
managers or a teams decision may bring pressure, 
and individuals may find it difficult to assert their 
own reluctance or opposition. Ideally, practitioners 


can conduct interviews with group members before 
administering the MBTI. This step allows practition- 
ers to ensure that clients know that taking the MBTI 
is voluntary, to inform them about the general nature 
of MBTI results, to clarify how results will and will 
not be used, and to prepare ahead of time to deal with 
issues of authority, trust, and group interactions. 

Regardless of whether individual interviews are 
possible, in conversation with the contracting individ- 
ual or group practitioners can ask a number of ques- 
tions to ensure voluntary completion of the MBTI: 

* How was the decision made to use the MBTI? 

* Were group members involved in the decision- 
making process? 

* What information do group members have about 
the MBTI and its appropriate uses? 

* Do the leader and contracting person understand 
that each individual may decide whether to com- 
plete the Indicator? 

* What consequences do they see if one or more 
individuals in the group choose not to complete 
the MBTI? 

* Are the leader and group prepared to accept each 
individuals decision and, if necessary, defend it? 

* What questions do they have? 

If practitioners have clarified the leaders and 
groups position on voluntary participation to their 
satisfaction but have not had an opportunity to speak 
with each individual, they can include in a letter to 
each respondent the principle that taking the MBTI is 
voluntary along with an invitation to contact the 
practitioner with any concerns or issues. This section 
includes suggested contents for a cover letter to 
accompany MBTI booklets and answer sheets. 

Practitioners occasionally find that one or more 
members of a group choose not to complete the 
MBTI. This may relate to an individuals previous 
experience with other instruments; to previous expe- 
rience of poor interpretations or uses of the MBTI; to 
personal issues with the leader, group, or organiza- 
tion; to concerns about protecting privacy; or to 
group trust issues. If possible, practitioners should 
speak directly with such individuals to clarify their 
issues and respond supportively and informatively. If 
the issue is trust within the group, the practitioner 
may decide that that issue needs to be dealt with first, 
before the MBTI is used. In a group in which distrust 
abounds, the MBTI is not likely to be useful. 





If, even after supportive clarification, a group member 
chooses not to complete the Indicator, practitioners 
need to have ways to support that decision. 





Suggestions for dealing with reluctant participants 
are included later in this chapter. 


Uses of Type in Organizations 361 





. How can practitioners ensure that MBTI results 


remain confidential? 

Practitioners need to clarity how the MBTI will be dis- 
tributed to respondents, how answer sheets will be 
returned, and where the results will be stored. In orga- 
nizations, MBTI booklets and answer sheets usually 
are distributed by mail or in a group meeting prior to 
the MBTI interpretation session. When practitioners 
are not administering the MBTI face-to-face, as is 
most often the case, thev need to include a cover let- 
ter for cach participant to accompany the booklet and 
answer sheet, with instructions for returning the 
materials to the practitioner. 

MBTI results are returned only to the respondent, 
and results should not be included in an organiza- 
tions files. Practitioners may keep individuals results 
(often useful for follow-up sessions) and should store 
them in a secure location. 

The information presented later in this section on 
dealing with reluctant participants discusses protect- 
ing confidentiality during interpretation sessions. 


. Are there special administration issues when using 


the self-scorable Form M in organizations? 

Practitioners who wish to use the self-scorable form 
need to include about 30 minutes to introduce the 
form and have clients complete the Indicator during 
the session. This needs to be done before explaining 


Jungs theory, defining the preferences, and giving 


examples. After all participants have completed the 
Indicator, the practitioner should direct clients to set 
the form aside while they listen to an introduction 
and interpretation of type (see outline of an introduc- 
tory session in this section). 

At the point in the introductory session where 
MBTI results are normally returned, the practitioner 
will need to lead clients through scoring their own 
answer sheets, using careful step-by-step instructions 
to minimize errors in scoring. 

Finally, the practitioner should instruct partici- 
pants to tear out the questions and scoring page and 
hand them in. This is essential to protect these 
restricted materials and to ensure that participants do 
not use the self-scorable with colleagues or friends 
who are not attending the session. 

Self-scorable forms should not, in general, be 
mailed to participants. Even with very clear instruc- 
tions, some participants are likely to score their Indi- 
cator before the session and therefore enter the ses- 
sion "knowing" their type, which is likely to bias both 
their self-estimate and their decision on their best-fit 
type. 


. What should be included in a letter of agreement 


with the contracting group or person? 
Administration issues can be dealt with most eflec- 
tively by using contracts or letters of understanding 


362 The Uses of Type 


prior to administration and by providing a cover let- 

ter to accompany each MBTI question booklet and 

answer sheet. The following issues need to be first clar- 
ified in conversation with the contracting person and 
then included in a letter of agreement: 

e The appropriate purpose lor using the MBTI 

e Ihe voluntary nature of completing the Indicator 

* The conlidentiality of results—they are for the re- 
spondent and will be shared only by the respondent 

* The procedures that will be used in administering, 
rcturning, and scoring the Indicator 

* The places where results will be stored (and not 
stored) 

* Provisions for return of results to participants who 
do not attend the session 

* The requirement that all restricted materials (e.g., 
question booklets and answer sheets) be returned 
to the qualified practitioner 

It may be useful to include a phrase such as "in accor- 

dance with the ethical principles of (professional orga- 

nization)," which gives the context for the agreements. 
6. What should be included in the cover letter to 
participants? 

When the MBTI will be distributed through the mail 

or by anyone other than the practitioner, a letter 

including the following information needs to accom- 
pany each booklet and answer sheet : 

e A brief description of the MBTI (for example, 
“The MBTI is a self-report inventory focusing on 
how people prefer to take in information, arrive at 
decisions, and orient themselves to the world.") 

* [he appropriate purposes for which the MBTI will 
be used 

* [he requirement that completing the Indicator is 
voluntary 

* [he confidentiality of results (they will be given 
only to the respondent) 

* [he provision of a face-to-face interpretation for 
cach respondent 

* A brief statement of directions (for example, 
"Read and follow the directions on the front of the 
question booklet.") 

* Information about returning the question booklet 
and answer sheet 

* The practitioners name, address, and phone num- 
ber, with an invitation to call with questions or 
concerns 


Summary 


The nature of organizational life—with its time pressures, 
focus on results, and explicit or implicit authority relation- 
ships—makes clarification of the issues discussed in this 
section particularly important for obtaining valid results on 
the Indicator in an organizational setting. This is doubly 
true when the supervisor, manager, or leader of the group is 


participating in the session. Ensuring correct administra- 
tion is a practical matter as well as an ethical one: individual 
results are more likely to be reliable and valid when guide- 
lines for administration are carefully implemented. 


Questions About Interpreting the MBTI 


The general guidelines for providing an interpretation of 
the MBTI and returning results are thoroughly outlined in 
Chapter 6 of this manual. This section will address imple- 
menting the steps in organizational settings, focusing on 
group interpretations and feedback. 


l. What do practitioners need to present before 
returning MBTI results? 

Interpretation sessions typically include the following 

before MBTI results are returned to clients: 

* Distribution of Introduction to Type to each par- 
ticipant for use during the session and for supple- 
mental reading or activities 

* Brief background relating the MBTI to Jung, 
Myers, and Briggs, including Myers’ purpose: to 
make Jungs theory of human functioning of prac- 
tical use to people 

* A definition and illustration of what the MBTI is 
indicating—underlying preferences, as opposed to 
characteristics such as traits 

e Clarification that everyone uses all of the preference 
domains identified by the MBTlI—psychological 
type is about peoples most natural way of doing 
something, their “home base” 

* A clear statement about the valne of each of the 
preferences identified by type and examples related 
to work that illustrate their value 

e Unbiased descriptions of each dichotomy: basic def- 
initions and a relevant example of each preference 

e Explicit acknowledgment that people may be dif- 
ferent when they are “at home" and when they are 
in environments involving authority or other 
kinds of external pressures (The goal of the intro- 
ductory session is to help clients assess who they 
are outside of the roles they play.) 

e An opportunity for clients to “self-estimate” their 
type (This process can be as simple as making a 
check mark next to the preferences they select after 
looking at the descriptions in Introduction to Type.) 

* Explanation or a visual representation of what 
clients MBTI results will look like and appropriate 
interpretations of the preference clarity index 
(Refer to Introduction to Type, which provides a 
structure for this.) 

There are a couple of important reasons for doing 
all this before returning results. First, the MBTI is dif- 
ferent from most psychological inventories, which are 
trait measures indicating to what extent people possess 
or display certain behaviors. Organizational clients are 





rw 


typically familiar with trait measures and how the 
results are interpreted. As a type sorter, the MBTI pro- 
vides fundamentally different information, and clients 
need to understand that before seeing “how they came 
out” (sce Chapter 1, pages 4-5, and Chapter 2, page 11, 
for a more complete discussion of the crucial distinc- 
tions between trait and type pictures of personality). 

Sceond, results on all psychometric instruments 
are estimates or hypotheses based on how an individ- 
ual responded to questions at a particular time and 
place, and this is true for MBTI results. Clients, how- 
evcr, tend to be accustomed to believing in numbers— 
they are “hard” evidence. Practitioners need to sup- 
port clients in using their own judgment, in assessing 
their results on the instrument based on their knowl- 
edge of themselves. Presenting the information listed 
above and asking clients to self-estimate their type 
gives them the information they need and explicit 
encouragement to process their MBTI results rather 
than accepting or rejecting them. 


. How should MBTI resulis be returned in group 


settings? 

Alter following these steps, practitioners have a num- 
ber of options for reporting MBTI results to cach indi- 
vidual. Computer scoring of Form M answer sheets 
uses itcm response theory (IRT) scoring, which gives 
thc most accurate estimate of type and provides à 
varicty of optional computer-generated reports. Report 
options arc listed in Table 5.2, page 107, and in the 
publishers catalogue. Computer-scoring software is 
also available. 

From the practitioners viewpoint, the primary 
limitation of computer-generated MBTI reports is that 
they give information about each clients reported type 
(results on the MBTI). Researchers report that about 
2596 of clients disagree with their MBTI results on 
one or more of the four dichotomies, with indica- 
tions that the percentage may be higher for those 
who take the MBTI in a work setting (sce Table 6.1, 
page 116). If computer reports are used, practition- 
ers need to provide a process that will allow each 
individual to receive a computer report of his or her 
chosen best-fit type. 

Form M can also be scored by the practitioner 
using scoring templates, and a self-scorable Form M 
is available. lf practitioners choose thesc scoring 
options, they can purchase from the publisher forms 
lor reporting MBTI results. A brief report of individ- 
ual results, conpled with use of Introduction to Type, 
provides all the information included in the computer 
reports and gives both bricf and full descriptions of all 
16 types. 

Whichever scoring and reporting option a practi- 
tioner chooses, care should be taken to protect confi- 
dentiality of individual results as they are returned. 


Uses of Type in Organizations 363 


3. How can practitioners assist clients in deciding on 
their best-fit type in group settings? 
Alter defining the MBTI preferences, ask clients to 
combine thc four letters they selected while listening 
to the interpretation. This provides one hypothesis— 
their self-estimate based on their understanding of 
themselves, their understanding of what the MBTI is 
designed to indicate, and the professionals expertise 
in explaining the type dichotomies. Then return 
their MBTI results and tell them this is a second hy- 
pothesis, based on how they responded to the Indica- 
tor questions. 

If their two hypotheses agree, clients can go directly 
to their full type description to verily that this is the 
best fit for them. If their hypotheses disagrec on one or 
more preferences, practitioners can direct them to use 
the steps outlined in the “Verifying Your Type” scction 
in Introduction to Typc. Using the steps and the lan- 
guage there—and ensuring that there is time lor it in 
the session—will provide participants with the oppor- 
tunity to find the type that fits best for them. 

Practitioners should provide a variety of relevant 
resourees in addition to the 16 type descriptions; for 
example, Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; 
Kummerow, 1998), Introduction to Type and Teams 
(Hirsh, 1998), or any of the applications resources listed 
in this chapter provide additional information that can 
assist clients in deciding on their own best-fit type. 

4. What else needs to be inclnded in an introductory 
session? 
As indicated in this chapters section on introducing 
the MBTI into organizations, introductory sessions 
need to include opportunities for clients to apply type 
to their work lives. The activities suggested in this 
chapter and in thc resource materials listed allow 
clients to expand their understanding of type, to con- 
firm their own preferences, and to recognize the value 
of using type in interacting with colleagues. 





Questions About Other Special Concerns 


Even with carcful attention to administration and interprc- 
tation guidelines, practitioners using the MBTI in organiza- 
tions can lace a number of potentially difficult ethical 
issues. The most frequent problem areas identified by con- 
sultants are the following: 


B Interpretation and misinterpretation of the numerical 
portion of MBTI results 

B Ensuring individual confidentiality in group sessions 

B Stereotyping of types and bias lor or against certain types 
or preferences 

B^ Copyright violations and use of restricted materials by 
nonqualified individuals 


This section suggests ways to respond appropriately to each 
of these issues. 


364 


i 


The Uses of Type 


. How can practitioners ensure that numerical scores 


are interpreted correctly? 

Numerical scores need to be presented by their name: 
the preference clarity index. The number that accom- 
panies each letter indicates how clearly and consis- 
tently clients “voted” for one of the opposites on a 
particular dichotomy. These numbers do not indicate 
“how much” of this preference domain an individual 
possesses nor how skilled a person may be in using 
the preference. 





High numbers indicate that, when forced to choose, the 
client consistently chose one pole of the dichotomy 
over the other. Low numbers indicate that, when forced 
to choose, the client "split che vote.” 





lt is helpful to tell clients that the MBTI is a 
“sorter” rather than a measuring instrument. The goal 
is to sort respondents into the “correct-for-them” cat- 
egory. The MBTI was not designed to indicate 
strength, skill, or frequency of behaviors. 

It can also be helpful to explicitly state that MBTI 
results do not fall on a normal curve, as do results 
from most of the instruments with which clients are 
familiar. When an instruments results fall on a nor- 
mal curve, there is a “normal” or “average” range and 
there are varying degrees of extreme scores with 
appropriate interpretations. The MBTI does not have 
norms about where individuals *should come out"; 
the only standard of judgment for results is the indi- 
viduals own decision about which pole of a type 
dichotomy best defines his or her own most natural 
way of functioning. 


. How can practitioners ensure individual confiden- 


tiality in group settings? How can practitioners deal 
with reluctant participants who do not complete the 
MBTI or who decline to share their type with col- 
leagues? 
Practitioners, leaders, and colleagues may all agree 
with the ethical principles that taking the MBTI is 
voluntary and that results belong to the individual; 
however, they can feel puzzled about how to support 
these principles when using the MBTI in work 
groups. As indicated in the section on administration, 
careful preparation and the use of a cover letter to 
aceompany booklets and answer sheets will normally 
identify people who are unwilling to take the Indica- 
tor or who have concerns about sharing their type 
preferences during the group session. With this infor- 
mation, practitioners can plan their MBTI sessions to 
ensure that using the Indicator does not put individu- 
als on the spot or add 10 a climate of distrust. 
Members of an intact work group who choose not 
to take the Indicator need to attend the introductory 
session: all group or team members need to receive 
the same information and materials about the MBTI. 





[hey can participate in the “handedness” exercise, 
receive a copy of the materials provided, listen to defi- 
nitions and examples of the preferences, and make a 
self-estimate. 

When group members engage in activities related 
to their decisions about their types, however, it is wis- 
est to provide the non-MBTI taker with a role such as 
“observer.” Practitioners can prepare a simple observer 
assignment ahead of time; for example: “Observe the 
process and interactions of each gronp and be pre- 
pared to tell us about one similarity and one differ- 
ence you observed.” This gives those who do not 
want to take the MBTI a real role to play and ensures 
that their reluctance will not interfere with the 
groups ability to develop an understanding of type 
and application of the concepts. 

The same observer role can be offered more gener- 
ally to the group for those who are unsure of or unde- 
cided about one or more of their preferences. This 
allows those who are not ready to identify their type to 
participate in the group and learn from their colleagues. 


. How can practitioners deal with bias and stereo- 


typing? 

In some organizational settings, psychological type 
and the MBTI have been introduced in ways that lead 
to stereotyping of individuals and types. People who 
are targets of such categorizing naturally resent it and 
often reject type and the MBTI. Such an outcome of 
an organization development activity obviously does 
a disservice to the organization and clients, as well as 
to the MBTI and type theory. 

Organizational type practitioners can avoid such 
misuses of the MBTI by committing to two comple- 
mentary strategies: (a) developing their own type 
understanding, including recognizing and finding 
ways to mitigate the inevitable biases that accompany 
their own type preferences; and (b) dealing explicitly 
with bias and stereotyping as part of their introduction 
to type sessions and any additional work using type. 

The MBTI practitioners responsibility is to present 
type in an unbiased way, using cogent, relevant exam- 
ples of the usefulness of the different preferences 
within the organizational environment. Following 
this, practitioners need to present the four-letter types 
as dynamic categories and tendencies. They need to 
emphasize that every successful adult has developed a 
variety of behaviors and skills in areas that are not 
their preferred ones, and that this development, cou- 
pled with recognition of ones natural styles, can be a 
positive contribution to work. 


. What can help practitioners understand thcir own 


biascs? 

To present an unbiased explanation of type, practi- 
tioners need to understand their own type and how it 
may affect their presentations. They also need to 
become aware of their own natural biases related to 


type. The following professional development actions 

assist practitioners in meeting these responsibilities: 

* Clarify your own type: What is your type? Your 
dominant function? Your auxiliary function? What 
does your type contribute to your work? Where do 
your type preferences sometimes get in your way? 
What is your preferred communication style? How 
do others experience you as a communicator? A 


organization. 

* “Mutual Usefulness of Opposite Types” lists posi- 
live ways people with opposite preferences can pro- 
vide balance to one’s perspective. Again, practi- 
tioners can review this with elients and ask them 
for examples of when they have supported or been 





365 


Uses of Type in Organizations 





an individual prefers to strueture and schedule the 
decision-making process or leave it open for addi- 
tional information—both of which are valuable ways 
to. procced.. WORK Types (Kunimerow, Barger, &amp; 
Kirby, 1997) includes in the chapter on teams a sec- 
tion focusing on type bias, reframing, and tips for 
dealing with type bias that can be very helpful for 
practitioners and the groups with which they work. 


decision maker? 6. How can practitioners protect restricted materials 
e Clarify vour understanding of the differences between and honor copyrights? 

trait-measuring and type-sorting instruments: What Ensuring that restricted materials are used only by 

do the numbers accompanying the preference let- qualified professionals is an important part of practi- 

ter (the preference clarity index) mean? What arc tioners ethical responsibility MBTI question booklets 

some everyday examples you can use to quickly and answer sheets need to be collected, including 

explain the differences to your chents? those portions of the self-seorable form. If answer 
e Practice describing the preferences. to people of sheets are returned for scoring without the question 

different types and ask for feedback: Are you de- booklet, the practitioner should contact the individu- 

scribing your nonpreferred areas based on your als directly to retrieve the question booklet. Organiza- 

own use of those areas, or have you gathered iufor- tions that use the MBTI with employees regularly 

mation that enables you to describe them as they may stock question booklets and answer sheets. In 

are experienced and used by people who have this case, the practitioner needs to ensure that the 

those preferences? Do you have colleagues knowl- individual responsible for storing and distributing the 

edgeable about the MBIT with preferences differ- MBTI understands all steps in administration and 

ent from yours? Can you provide mutual feedback? return of materials. It is generally best to have such 

5. How can practitioners create a more positive re- steps in writing. 

sponse by participanis during the introduction to Copying of copyrighted materials is, of course, 
type session? illegal. Practitioners need to model respect for copy- 
Because psychological type deals with common right, as well as explicitly refusing to “loan” materials 
everyday behaviors, clients sometimes bring their pet to clients for copying. The occasional photocopied 
peeves and biases into type discussions, often in the answer sheet that has been completed by a client 
form of “humor.” Introduction to Type includes three should be returned to the individual unscored, with 
sections that practitioners can use to create a more the offer of an opportunity to complete the Indicator 
positive response: using an original answer sheet. 
* "Constructive Use of Differences" directly addresses 

typical biases by type dichotomies. Practitioners 

can discuss these with the group and ask for exam- 

ples of such biases that they have heard in their : 

Conclusion 


Used appropriately, the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and 
Jungian psychological type provide a wealth of positive 
organizational applications: 


Developing self-understanding 

Increasing appreciation for colleagues 

Improving communication 

Dealing with conflicts 

Enhancing problem solving and decision making 
Planning, implementing, and managing organizational 


supported in these ways. 

* “Things to Remember About Type” summarizes 
important points about appropriate and inappro- 
priate use of MBTI results and type. 

Practitioners also can reframe biased comments from 

group members. For example, a client who exclaims, 

“Fm an Intuitive; | dont do details,” ean be asked if it 

would be more correct to say the following: “It’s eas- 

ier for me to grasp and remember details when | have 
the overall concept fully developed." A client who 
states that “P stands for Procrastinating" can be 
reminded that all types may procrastinate, and that 
the Judging-Perceiving dichotomy is about whether 


5 


change 
m Recognizing and managing stress 


Four decades ol research support a wide variety of applica- 
tions and provide resources for practitioners and clients. 

Used with work groups and teams or with individuals in 
developmental activities, the MBTI has proven a practical, 
positive tool for organizational development. 


Ls ee "ud ot 4 - - 


"d á OI 7s d pue ed 
l suite. 8 © SDJ dL LPs Y Peeps 


M. à l Lr BE Fad AMA A EY ne), E f 
te vn m t do TT eet parma eg, 
| “ray ged Ae, mend 


^ E a 
vast to ode Lie aho | Ok aor 
» Nc voun we” ni WAR D E 4 TR. 
h os 


-— Tes — 80x vo Rr 7 JA i A i 
J 
POS A git 7 A atu s Tim citani 
2 
i ut 272 Ny d x T ap ey ' 
1* aa" La &gt; | | 


(n Pm * 
Vide ae o PRU SEV ILL 


tá ^g rf | "2m GS am es 


old au is TUE MA rr 


PE D A M m 
ê Téa 4 uu 7 
$ 8 nd i up. ae @: 24.4 f lå 


"TN o " DN Ql» @ eee. 
Pus eli =e red un d" te 
. reine: mb 9 0e. ^ CUP a, TAPA 
wo c- dr we am t4 v» TE 
plows a... OU Stu Sip m s^ WEE. GOR, 
$i V 5878 2 tatem | s pem 
aec n a yes M Pp a 
a0) a t9 ‘a ageret Max IP PPS 
o diel ap t 4 idiom Mae cmo 28 am 


' 


^ Ai ap isalu iro tpe à do PI 
ool | | =&gt; pe Ha Po 
ub &amp; Aj i-r; o ui 


tO o&gt; TO Coa Oe ^u. o 4.5 ye oe 

(Lee! nn 9.9 le 607—759 me? SE 

lac a Gua Se PF due dab 

UPS -41)«eteo -— 4 &amp;€ p &gt; = IAM ə l Te Par me 

zant TANC A p? ETD i p i u H M | ^ro | Ps 
lup Cero ros" 1 OS Gc cA M PR 


i LE M zu * "i" 2 

KAREP $ WA Gu 7 M » M ore A eur 
dox E H | xS Gom 
wT S lodi di. did DL M wre "P 
SE Rd inse 


hesautine | — 


à e h 
s ' ^. B LS Á e 
i "Y ij 14 * 9); aq («4 A ae r PIA  @ l 
D o i â A ^ À T. i i 1 A a 3 a 
on ^ d | N ] dd Á » $ E a à | 


av? ubi n C6 y ft pue 
i - if om, gig" EE "um. 
sor feta Moa ait and Tu PONS SS i br 
i se ‘o/s pp a 44 m age | 
~re à arm |e Mna 
ral (ott tua, o 
gnoma ate niha eh O 
adiu ee ee o. We ap así odi qm 
uL *o c 


d s de 7 Hom &lt;a @ 


"Uy I» um Do d'a d — = O iau" 
ee Wisp, pee ba sta 
Mae” B. s 3.6 OGY VP P 
s e the y PM A 
SAL 7 » ô e e *4 ry Licht B 


à 
é i ime” pri "z mi ins d) 


Lae b suc 
! fouet 


Ld E 





Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings | 4 


Type and Culture 


Using the MBTI Personality 
Inventory in Multicultural Settings 


Practical Concerns About 
Multicultural Use of the MBTI 


Translations of the MBTI 
Multicultural Scoring Issues 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Multicultural Settings 


Multicultural Type 
Distribution Samples 


Conclusion 


Contributed by Linda K. Kirby and Nancy J. Barger 


sabel Briggs Myers and Katharine Briggs hypothesized, 
as did Carl G. Jung, that the theory of psychological 
type identified significant underlying patterns of function- 
ing that are common to all people (Myers with Myers, 
1980/1995). In the 1985 Manual, Myers and McCaulley 
stated this hypothesis in their only direct comment on type 


and culture: 


Jungs theory is concerned with perception and judgment, which 
are information gathering and decision making, or taking in the 
sumulus and making the response. Because most behavior is 
concerned with perception or with judgment, type differences 
can be expected to occur across a very broad range of life events. 
Jung believed he was describing mental processes common to 
the entire human species. To the extent that he was correct, type 
differences should be consistent across cultures. (p. 223) 


Myers and McCaulley then cited three research studies— 
two with African American students in the United States 
and one in Japan—that supported the validity of Jungs psy- 
chological type theory and of the Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor personality inventory with those groups (Carlson &amp; 
Levy, 1973; Myers, 1977; Ohsawa, 1975, 1981). 

The years since publication of the 1985 Manual have 
seen rapid expansion of the use of psychological type and of 
the MBTI personality inventory in international and multi- 
cultural settings. “Multicultural Applications” in MBTI Ap- 
plications (Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996) summarizes dozens of 
articles by researchers and practitioners using the MBTI in 
non-U.S. cultures. This chapter will refer to some of that 
research and to interviews with practitioners and researchers 
using the MBTI in international and multicultural settings, 
as well as to the authors’ experience.’ Those who desire 


367 


368 The Uses of Type 


more complete information on the research should refer to 
the summaries in Kirby and Barger. 

Multicultural and international practitioners use the 
MBTI in a wide variety of ways—in fact, in all of the ways 
discussed in the chapters in Part V, "Uses of Type.” This 
chapter will not focus on particular applications such as mul- 
ticultural counseling or organizational development but 
instead will discuss the broader core issues important to 
practitioners who want to use the Mycrs-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor with groups and individuals who are culturally different 
from those with whom the MBTI was developed and tested. 


Type and Culture 


Social and cultural anthropologists have developed dozens 
of definitions of culture. One that seems clear and straight- 
forward is provided hy Geert Hofstede (1991) of the Insti- 
tute for Research on Intercultural Cooperation: Culture is 
learned “patterns of thinking, feeling, and acting,” or, using 
Hofstedes analogy to computers, the “software of the mind” 
(pp. 4-5). In his definition, Hofstede distinguishes culture 
from those parts of human functioning that are genetic and 
common to all, which he refers to as the “operating system” 
of the human mind. Hofstede’s diagram of human personal- 
ity, Shown in Figure 14.1, outlines these components. 

Jung, Myers, and Briggs believed that psychological type 
provides a basic structure similar to Hofstede’s “operating 
system." For them, the patterns of psychological type are a 
universal component of human nature. In their view of 
human functioning, type preferences would fit in the base of 
Hofstedes diagram and, along with culture, shape each 
human personality. 

Social and cultural anthropologists have not, for the 
most part, accepted or even explored this Jungian hypothe- 
sis.^ The focus of cultural study and theory has been on the 
seemingly endless variety of ways in which human beings 
have organized themselves—on culturally derived differ- 
ences in assumptions, values, morals, laws, customs, and 
behavior. On the other hand, psychologists, counselors, 
and organizational development specialists using psycho- 
logical type and the MBTI have produced a significant 
amount of information about the applicability and useful- 
ness of psychological type in a wide variety of cultures. 
Their experience and research gencrally support the univer- 
sality of psychological type patterns. 

Those who would usc the MBTI in multicultural settings 
need to be knowledgeable about and respectful of both the 
differences in people related to culture and the similarities 
related to psychological type patterns. 

Much more research, such as Wilson and Languis’ (1989) 
study of brain wave pattern differences and the studies 
reported in Kirby and Barger (1996), is needed to demon- 
strate the common mental patterns that psychological type 


Specific to Inherited 
individual and learned 
PERSONALITY 






Specific 
to group 
or category 


Learned 


Universal inherited 


Figure 14.1 Three Levels of Uniqueness in Human Mental 
Programming 

Source. From Cultures ond Orgonizations: Softwore of the Mind, p 6, by G Hofstede, 1991 Copyright 1991 

by McGraw-Hill. Used with permission. 


hypothesizes; but current research and practice with psy- 
chological type and the MBTI are sufficient to proceed with 
the hypothesis that clients in different cultures can recog- 
nize and make use of psychological type explanations. 
While proceeding, practitioners need to recognize the signif- 
icant influence of culture on the ways different people expe- 
rience and express psychological type patterns. 


Using the MBTI Personality 
Inventory in Multicultural Settings 


Although psychological type may describe universal human 
characteristics, using any personality instrument with 
groups culturally different from those with whom it was 
developed raises questions about appropriateness of the 
instrument for the target population and about interpreta- 
tion of results. The remainder of this chapter examines 
questions related to use of the instrument. 

The basic question lor practitioners who want to usc the 
MBTI in other cultures is this: Will the MBTI assist their 
clients in identifying their Jungian type preferences? The 
items on the Indicator ask respondents to choose between 
everyday surface behaviors that Myers believed indicate the 
decper, underlving patterns of type. The kinds of behaviors 
she used are affected by cultural values and norms. The 
MBTI was developed and tested primarily with middle- 
class, White Americans, and rescarch reports significant 
evidence for the Inventory’s reliability and validity when it is 
used with people who are culturally similar to them (Ham- 
mer, 1996b; Myers @ McCaulley, 1985; sce also Chapters 8 
and 9 of this manual). Will those same questions work to 
indicate type in groups with different cultural values and 


norms? Is there comparable evidence for the reliability and 
validity of the MBTI in cultures other than that of middle- 
class, White Americans? 


Reliability and Validity of the MBTI 
in Other Cultures 


The selection of items and the calculation of item weights 
for the new Form M of the MBTI included a much more 
representative sampling of U.S. co-cultural groups than 
those used to develop and standardize the inventorys ear- 
lier forms. Currently available studies of the reliability and 
validity of the MBTI in other cultures are based on Form G. 
This research, reported in Kirby and Barger (1996), 
includes significant evidence for the reliability and validity 
of the MBTI in a variety of other groups with different cul- 
tural characteristics. 

For example, hundreds of studies of the validity of the 
MBTI conducted in predominantly English-speaking cul- 
tures report results very similar to those of validity studies 
conducted in the United States. These include reports of 
students type preferences and major fields of study (Casas, 
1990; Borham &amp; Watts, 1994); comparisons of type distri- 
butions of school administrators in Canada (Anderson, 
1992) with those in the United States; differences in type 
distributions in United Kingdom organizations with those 
in different cultures (Oswick, Mahoney, &amp; Stein, 1994); 
comparisons of type distributions of police officers in Aus- 
tralia, the United Kingdom, and the United States (Lidgard 
&amp; Bates, 1988); and others. 

Dozens of studies of the MBTI in more diverse cultures 
also provide validity evidence. Among others, Call and 
Sotillo (1993) compared results on the Group Embedded 
Figures Test and type for U.S. students and students from 
Spanish-speaking countries; Yao (1993) analyzed types of 
female school administrators in the People’s Republic of 
China; Lim (1994) reported results of using the MBTI with 
Singaporean high school students; Van Rooyen (1994) 
compared results of South African female managers on the 
Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory and the MBTI to 
results obtained in similar U.S. studies; and numerous prac- 
tiioners described their use of the MBTI with diverse 
groups in the United States (Huitt, 1989; Jones, Ukishima, 
Sakamoto, Tanouye, &amp; Giron, 1995; Levy &amp; Ostrowski, 
1983; Simmons &amp; Barrineau, 1994). 

A recent study with two groups of Whites in South 
Africa provided additional support for the validity of the 
MBTI in that country (Zietsmann, 1996). One group con- 
sisted of 804 White adult high school graduates; the other 
of 1,943 "reasonably representative of the white South 
African population with a very diverse sampling of profes- 
sions, industries, and status levels" (p. 186). Using factor 
analysis of the responses, Zietsmaun found “the meaning of 
the MBTI items and scalcs is substantially the same for South 
African subjects as it is for U.S. subjects" (p. 186; italics in 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Seuings 369 


original). No comparable study has yet been completed 
with their sample of Black South Africans. 

The great majority of multicultural and international 
MBTI studies report results comparable to those found in 
similar studies in the United States and support the validity 
of the MBTI instrument when used appropriately in those 
cultures. 


Cultural Groups for Whom 
the MBTI May Not Be Appropriate 


Some practitioners have found that the MBTI personality 
inventory may not work to identify type preferences in cul- 
tures in which group or communal identity is a central 
value. Hofstede refers to such cultures as colleetivist and 
defines them as “societies in which the interest of the group 
prevails over the interest of the individual” (1991, p. 50). 

The MBTI has been used successfully in many cultures 
in which group social values are important: Latin American 
countries such as Mexico and Brazil, Asian nations such as 
China and Korea, and African countries such as Nigeria and 
South Africa. However, when a culture combines values 
about the centrality of group identity with the experience 
of oppression, as is truc for many indigenous cultures, the 
MBTI may be less appropriate. 

For example, Jopie De Beer (1997), a South African psy- 
chologist, reported on a database of almost 6,500 South 
Africans including 930 Blacks. She expressed this concern 
about use of the MBTI within Black South African culture: 


Group solidarity amongst the indigenous people of Africa and 
in particular South Africa is often referred to as UBUNTU 
(umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu—or, a person only becomes a 
person through other people). UBUNTU is characterized by 
the following values: solidarity, cooperation, hospitality, toler- 
ance, joyful service, harmony, dignity, compassion, consensus, 
trust, compromise, accommodation, caring about others, and 
readiness to “go the extra mile." (p. 12) 


Colin Hopkirk (personal communication, 1997) reported 
similar questions about using the MBTI with New Zealand 
Maori who remain primarily within their native culture. He 
gave the following explanation of the cultural values that may 
make the MBTI inappropriate for this group: "[T]hey per- 
ceive and experience themselves first as a part of the whole 
creation, second as part of the hapu (tribe) of which they are 
the product, third as part of the whanau (extended family) 
from which they descend, and only last as a distinct individ- 
ual personality." 

Collectivist values may make it difficult for individuals 
within these cultures to respond to the MBTI lor at least 
two reasons: 


I. The centrality and importance ol group identity and 
cultural norms may make it difficult for individuals to 
identily and report their natural individual prefer- 
ences. Practitioners who use the MBTI in organiza- 
tional settings within the United States find that an 


370 The Uses of Type 


organizations cultural norms influence peoples abil- 
ity to report their natural type preferences (Kum- 
merow, 1988), and we would expect that broader cul- 
tural norms would also influence an individual's 
desire and ability to use the instrument to indicate his 
or her underlying preferences. 

. The ways in which type preferences are expressed 
within these cultures may be significantly different 
(rom the ways in which those preferences are gener- 
ally described from the perspective of an individual- 
istic culture. In a culture that expects and values regu- 
lar family/group interaction, for example, Introversion 
may not be expressed by finding time alone. Instead, 
individuals preferring Introversion may have found 
other ways—acceptable in their culture—to support 
their need for internal processing time. Thereforc, the 
items on the MBTI may not tap in to the ways in- 
dividuals in that culture experience and express their 
psychological type preferences. For more informa- 
tion on this, see the section in this chapter on inter- 
preting the MBTI. 





In spite of these anticipated difficulties, Hopkirk (per- 
sonal communication, 1997) stated that, in his experience, 
Maori who are bicultural “seem to accept the MBTI and 
often find it sensible and useful.” Likewise, De Beer made 
the following observation about using the MBTI with South 
African Whites, Afrikaaners, and Blacks: “We have not really 
had major problems with people responding to the indica- 
tor... . [W]e have been surprised at how easily most cul- 
tures seem to understand the items” (De Beer, personal com- 
munication, 1997). 

That the MBTI personality inventory may not work to 
identify psychological type in some collectivist cultures does 
not, of course, necessarily invalidate Jungs hypothesis that 
these individuals have psychological type preferences. It does 
encourage caution when using the MBTI in such settings. 

In deciding whether the MBTI is appropriate for clients 
from collectivist cultures, practitioners need to assess 
degrees of acculturation. Clients whose primary cultural 
reference is their collectivist culture may find taking the 
MBTI unhelpful or even offensive, while those who are 
bicultural or whose primary reference is the majority cul- 
ture are less likely to experience such difficulties. 

Practitioners who have questions about the cultural 
appropriateness of using the MBTI with particular groups or 
individuals should consult resources such as the following: 


w Rollock and Terrell (1996), Multicultural Issues in Assess- 
ment: Toward An Inclusive Model 

m Sue (1998), Multicultural Counseling Competencies: Indi- 
vidual and Organizational Development 

w American Psychological Association (1990), Guidelines 
for Providers of Psychological Services to Ethnic, Linguistic 
and Culturally Diverse Populations 


8 Dana (1993), Multicultural Assessment: Perspective for 
Professional Psychology 
W Brislin (1990), Applied Cross-Cultural Psychology 


These works discuss acculturation and other important 
issues related to using psychological instruments in cultures 
diffcrent from those within which they were developed. 

A slightly different question was raised by practitioners 
who use the MBTI in an organizational setting in the Ameri- 
can Southwest. Their Native American (primarily Navaho 
and Hopi) clients willingly complete the Indicator and seem 
to find it useful for understanding communication and team 
functioning; however, these practitioners question its uscful- 
ness for increasing self-understanding for these clients. Their 
Native cultures include traditional ways for members to dis- 
cover the meaning of their lives and to understand how their 
individual existence fits within the history and tradition of 
the family and tribe. It may be that the culturally identified 
ways for developing self-understanding for individuals in 
these cultures will work better and be more appropriate than 
the MBTI and psychological type theory (K. Salazar and G. 
Sanchez, personal communication, 1997). 

On the other hand, Mary E. Loomis, a Jungian analyst 
and coauthor of the Singer-Loomis Inventory, used Native 
American concepts such as the medicine wheel, the Powers 
ol the Four Directions, and the Star Maiden Circle as analo- 
gies for Jungs psychological tvpe theory in her Dancing the 
Whecl of Psychological Types (1991). In her view, the two 
approaches to human functioning are complementary. 

A more thorough understanding of cultural values in 
indigenous and collectivist cultures may allow MBTI practi- 
tioners to develop culturally congruent ways to present 
Jungs theory of human functioning. 


Cultural Differences in the Expression 
of Psychological Type: Extraversion 
and Introversion 


The following anecdote was reported by two members of the 
Association for Psychological Type, a professional associa- 
tion for users of psychological type, whose membership is 
primarily from North America. The story illustrates an 
important issue in using the MBTI with cultures other than 
ones own. 


When we first attended a psychological type conference in Great 
Britain in 1991, we observed to colleagues at the end of the first 
evening, "You dont seem to have any ENFPs at this conference." 
They assured us that, as in the United States, ENFPs were well 
represented in the British Association for Psychological Type 
and many were present at the conference. We commented that, 
from our U.S. experience, we couldnt identily ENFPs—or 
those preferring Extraversion more generally—because they 
were not exhibiting the characteristics we associated with 
Extraversion in the United States. The response of our British 
colleagues was that they found it similarly difficult to identify 
those preferring Introversion in the United States because U.S. 


Introverts exhibited behavior that in the United Kingdom was 
associated with Extraversion: sociability, comfort with small 
talk, disclosure of personal information, energetic and fast- 
paced conversation, and so forth. 


Some practitioners and researchers have looked to type 
disiributions in different cultures to explain differences in 
behavior, believing, for example, that there must be more 
people preferring Introversion in Britain than in the United 
Siates. However, the 1997 normative type sample studies 
conducted in the United Kingdom and the United States 
produced very similar percentages of people preferring 
Extraversion and Introversion—about 5096-5096 in each 
case (see Table 14.1 on p. 379). The difference noted in indi- 
vidual behavior in group settings or with strangers is not due 
to differences in type preference distribution between the 
United Kingdom and the United States but instead is due to 
the ways cultural norms and expectations affect expression 
ol type. 


Each culture defines appropriate ways to express particular 


preferences. 


Because culture influences the ways type is expressed, 
practitioners may need to modify their type definitions, and 
especially the behaviors they associate with type prefer- 
ences in their examples, to communicate type effectively in 
another culture. The preferred way to do this is to interview 
individuals or groups about how they experience and 
express their type preferences within their culture. Evi- 
dence from interviews with people of different types in a 
variety of cultures supports both the existence of the under- 
lying type patterns and differences in the ways they are 
experienced and expressed in different cultures (Barger &amp; 
Kirby, 1993, 1995b; Intravisit, 1986). 


Cultural Differences in the Expression of 
Psychological Type: Sensing and Judging 


To date, almost every culture for which there are type data 
reports a predominance of Sensing Judging types, and the 
great majority report STJ as the modal type in the culture 
(Casas, 1990). Because of the prevalence of this type combi- 
nation in different cultures and because of the nature of this 
preference combination, STJ expression of type provides a 
particular cautionary example for practitioners using type 
in cultures other than their own. 

In De Beers analysis (1997) of type preferences in South 
Africa, she stated that South African type experts shared a 
"common assumption that the indigenous black people are 
probably more Feeling than Thinking," based on the 
UBUNTU values characteristic of Black South African culture 
and observations of the behavior of Black South Africans. Yet 
the South African database of 6,452 people reports ESTJ and 
IST] as the most common types for Black South Africans, as 
well as for Whites. Among the 5,000 White South Africans, 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 371 


these two types accounted for almost 39% of the group, 
while 67.6% of the 930 Black South Africans reported these 
types. De Beer believed that, based on her own work in veri- 
fying type results with Black South Africans, the STJ pre- 
dominance shown in the database is correct. This seeming 
contradiction can be explained when one carefully exam- 
ines the underlying dynamic of STJ types, rather than 
applving behavioral standards from other cultures. 

The combination of preferences for Sensing, Thinking, 
and Judging produces a type that introverts Sensing and 
extraverts Thinking in Jungs dynamic picture of types. 
(Kirby and Barger addressed the behavioral implications of 
introverted Sensing in depth in "Multicultural Applica- 
tions," MBTI Applications, 1996.) A culture-neutral descrip- 
tion of STJs pictures them as factual, reality-based types: 
They take reality as a given and internalize the history, tra- 
ditions, and customs of their culture as “the way things 
are." They enjoy belonging to a group aud feel great loyalty 
toward that groups past, present, and future. Preserving 
culture and traditions is a primary value. 

Because of this underlying pattern, the observable be- 
havior of STJs is likely to clearly fit the cultural values of the 
group to which they belong. When their culture values 
"solidarity, cooperation, hospitality, tolerance, joyful ser- 
vice, harmony, dignity, compassion, consensus, trust, com- 
promise, accommodation, caring about others, and readi- 
ness to 'go the extra mile" (De Beer, 1997, p. 12), as Black 
South African culture does, STJs are likely to display behav- 
iors congruent with those values. To American eyes, this 
behavior may appear very different from expectations of 
STJ behavior based on U.S. cultural experience. 

Interpretations of type-related behavior formed through 
work with middle-class U.S. clients may distort or compro- 
mise understanding of type in other cultures. What is 
needed is a thorough understanding of the underlying type 
pattern and then exploration of how that pattern may be 
expressed within a particular culture. 


Summary 


Using any psychological instrument in a culture different 
from that in which it was developed and tested requires cau- 
tion and respect for diversity; however, MBT! researchers 
and practitioners in a wide variety of cultures report results 
very similar to those found by researchers and practitioners 
using the MBTI in the United States. Current evidence sup- 
ports use of the MBTI in most multicultural settings. 

In cultures with value systems that can be described as 
collectivist, the MBTI may not be appropriate. Practitioners 
should carefully consider its value and assess whether psy- 
chological type is a useful tool for self-understanding for 
these clients. 

When using the MBT! in multicultural or international 
settings, practitioners need to be aware that cultural values 
are likely to affect the ways in which individuals express 


372 The Uses of Type 


their type preferences. Examples of behavioral patterns 
based on U.S. samples may need to be modified or changed 
to reflect the ways cultural norms have influenced clients’ 
type-related behavioral habits. 


Practical Concerns About 
Multicultural Use of the MBTI 


Most of the studies reported above and in the research sum- 
maries in MBTI Applications (Kirby and Barger, 1996) used 
Form G (sometimes with minor spelling changes; for exam- 
ple, organise instead of organize). The use of the standard 
Form G or Form M with clients from other cultures re- 
quires attention to some practical issues related to client 
reading level, age, and language. The suggestions in Chapter 
6, “Administration,” about reading level and age need to be 
applied to multicultural clients in ways that fit for the cul- 
ture. Additionally, the sometimes colloquial and idiomatic 
language of the Indicator may create difficulties for some 
clients with English as a second language (ESL). 


Reading Levels 


Clients taking the MBTI personality inventory need to have 
a rcading level of seventh grade (approximately 12- to 13- 
year-olds) or above, based on U.S. reading norms. In the 
United States, eighth graders are usually about 13 years old 
and have completed seven or eight years of schooling. Prac- 
titioners are encouraged to find ways to check their clients’ 
reading levels in English. Wederspahn and Barger (1988) 
reported a thorough study using Form G with well-educated 
Filipinos. Based on this, they recommended a TOEFL (Test 
of English as a Foreign Language) level of 500 as a mini- 
mum, but there are no official guidelines or comparable 
research studies on this question. 


Age Levels 


The MBTI is appropriate for adults and young people 15 
years of age or older. Caution is recommended for use with 
younger clients (ages 12 to 14), and it is not recommended 
for use with children below I2 years old except for research 
purposes. Reliabilities for younger clients are typically 
slightly lower (though still acceptable) than those for adults, 
which Myers and McCaulley (1985) suggested may relate to 
issues of type development in younger respondents. 

The Murphy-Meisgeier Type Indicator for Children 
(MMTIC) is recommended for children approximately 7 to 
13 years old. The MMTIC consists of questions about every- 
day experiences common to children in the United States, 
such as Item #8: “You like to have: A. Lots of friends; B. A 
few close friends.” The MMTIC Manual (Meisgcier &amp; Mur- 
phy, 1987) states that the reading levcl for their instrument 


is 2.0 using a modified Fry system, and, with the exception 
of one or two items, the experiences drawn upon in thc 
items are at least potentially common to children attending 
school in a wide variety of cultures. 


Language Issues 


When the MBTI is used with clients for whom English is 
not the native language, some special considerations arise, 
and it is appropriate to check understanding before decid- 
ing to use the Indicator. According to the study by Weder- 
spahn and Barger (1988), even when non-native English 
speakers had sufficient command of English to understand 
the words in the MBII Form G, the use of idioms in some 
items created problems for their Filipino clients: “A speaker 
of English as a second language (ESL) may know all the 
words in the idiom 'somcone who has both fcet on the 
ground' without understanding the meaning of the phrase 
(practical/realistic), which is crucial to making a meaning- 
ful choice on this item" (p. 12). 

Many of the “low frequency vocabulary items" in Form 
G that created problems for Wederspahn and Bargers Fil- 
ipino clients have been eliminated in Form M. A few remain 
because they are good items in the United States, but they 
may be problematic for all but very advanced speakers of 
English. The following are words or phrases on Form M 
that were difficult for Wederspahn and Bargers clients and 
that practitioners may wish to check with their ESL clients: 


ingenious 
cramp (does a schedule cramp you?) 
hearty 


cherish 


Some of the idioms in Form G that Wederspahn and 
Barger found particularly troublesome to ESL speakers have 
also been removed, but a few remain and, again, should be 
checked with clients for understanding: 


a good mixer 
leave you cold 
to be tied down 
plunge in 


go with the flow 


The word pairs can create special problems, even for 
advanced speakers of English, because these items require 
respondents to choose between different possible definitions 
of the words and to understand the connotations in the 
United States. Wederspahn and Barger asked their clients 
how they defined touching (half of word pair #33, Form M: 
"convincing-touching"). Their clients responded, “making 
physical contact with the fingers,” a correct dictionary def- 
nition but not one likely to help respondents indicate their 
preference for Thinking or Feeling as the item intends. 
When Barger used Form G with a group of ESL managers of 


a Southeast Asian oil company (with clients from five differ- 
ent Southeast Asian cultures), she found that they were com- 
fortable with their overall results, but they did ask about the 
meaning of the word compassion, which occurs in three 
Form M questions: word pair #40, “compassion-foresight”; 
word pair #53, “compassionate—logical”; and phrase ques- 
tion #87, “Which is a higher compliment, to be called (A) 
competent, or (B) compassionate?" 

P A. Schmidt (personal communication, 1997), who 
works in Arab countries in the Middle East, reported client 
difficulties with the same items and words reported by 
Wederspahn and Barger. She indicated that she deals 
frankly with the language concerns of her ESL clients by 
saying something like this: 


You may encounter some idioms with which you are not famil- 
iar, or vou may find some words for which vou are not sure of 
the meaning. That is perfectly OK; its normal for people who 
fill out the American English version of the MBTI. Just do the 
best you can in answering the questions and skip any you don't 
understand. You'll have the opportunity in this class to listen to 
information about the type preferences and choose your own 
best-fit type. Your results from the Indicator will be part of that 
process, but you can *correct your answers," so to speak, as 
you decide on your own preferences. 


Summary 


Practitioners who have questions about their clients ability 
to understand the meaning of MBTI items are advised to 
explore these issues with their clients before using the Indi- 
cator. Many ESL clients—especially those working in orga- 
nizational settings—will be familiar with American idioms, 
and the number of questions affected by language concerns 
is small. In general, ESL clients find most items easy to 
answer, and, with attention to reading level, age, and possi- 
ble language issues, both practitioner and client can feel 
confident of the validity of their overall results on the MBTI. 


Translations of the MBTI 


While the MBTI has achieved satisfactory results in a wide 
variety of cultures, a validated translation of the Indicator in 
the clients native language is generally the preferred choice. 
The following sixteen translations have sufficient reliability 
and validity evidence to be sold commercially: 

Anglicized English 

Australian English 

Bahasa Malay 

Chinese 

Danish 

Dutch 

European French 


French Canadian 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 373 


German 

Italian 

Korean 

Norwegian 
Portuguese 
Spanish 
Spanish/Castellano 
Swedish 


Translations into additional languages are currently 
listed as “research instruments” and are typically being 
tested for reliability and validity. Practitioners wanting 
information about commercially available translations and 
about those currently being developed and tested should 
contact Consulting Psychologists Press. 


Challenges Faced by Translators of the MBTI 


Eduardo Casas, recipient ol the Isabel Briggs Myers Memor- 
ial Research Award in 1991 for his French translation of the 
MBTI, has done more than any other person to clarify what 
is required to develop a valid translation of the MBTI 
(Casas, 1990). The process and principles Casas identified 
were parallel in all essentials to those used by Isabel Myers 
in her original construction of the instrument as outlined in 
Chapter 9 of the 1985 Manual. 

Some of the challenges faced by translators of the MBTI 
are outlined below. 


Conceptual Challenges Translators must strive to find 
behaviors and attitudes related to type preferences that are 
appropriate for their culture. The UBUNTU values 
characteristic of South African Blacks described earlier, for 
example, include many concepts typically used in Western 
cultures to describe the Feeling function. If these are cul- 
tural values followed by most people in this culture, how 
can a translator find concepts and words that distinguish 
between Thinking and Feeling for this group? 


Linguistic Challenges According to De Beer (personal 
communication, [997), the Zulu language has very few 
words that convey the concept of the Intuition function, 
creating a challenge for developing a valid translation of the 
Sensing-Intuition dichotomy into that language. Sim and 
Kim (1993) reported difficulty in translating idiomatic 
expressions such as “eramp you.” 


Cultural Value Challenges Sim and Kim (1993) reported 
that they needed to rewrite some MBTI Form G items when 
they developed their Korean translation because "the Korean 
culture does not Favor the expression of emotions and 
feelings” (p. 19). Some of these Form G items that did not 
work with their Korean sample remain on Form M: 


thinking 'A' B’ feeling 
hearty ‘A’ B» quiet 


374 The Uses of Type 


Summary 


Translators who have successfully faced these challenges and 
followed the steps in item development, analysis, testing, 
and weighting used hy Isabel Myers in her original construc- 
tion of the MBTI have developed reliable and valid transla- 
tions. And they have found what Eduardo Casas (1995) 
called "experiential validity" as they have used these ver- 
sions—that is, their translations “work” for respondents. If 
such a translation of the MBTI is available in the clients 
native language, practitioners should choose the translation. 


Multicultural Scoring Issues 


Myers described item weighting as the way the MBTI 
accounts for the social desirability of items (Myers &amp; 
McCaulley, 1985). In cultures with values different from 
those of Americans, one would expect that the social desir- 
ability of some items will be different, and therefore those 
items should be weighted differently to provide clients with 
the most accurate results. 


Weighting of Items in Translations of the MBTI 


Developing a valid translation of the Indicator includes test- 
ing the translation on a representative sample group and 
collecting the data needed to assign appropriate item 
weights. Casas (1990), for example, found that the corre- 
sponding French words for the Introverted options on 
Form G item #31, “quiet” (Form M item #32); Form G item 
#37, “reserved” (Form M item 238); and Form G item #40, 
"calm" (not on Form M), did not discriminate between 
Introverts and Extraverts in his representative sample 
groups of Francophone Canadians. Fither the words used 
in the translation were inadequate, or cultural values in the 
French Canadian population supported the choice of these 
words by both Introverts and Extraverts. Because they do 
not discriminate, these options carry a weight of 0 in Casas 
French translation. 


Item Weights in Other Cultures 


Dillerences in social desirability affect responses to the stan- 
dard MBTI as well as to translations of the MBTI. Casas 
(1990) calculated prediction ratios on MBTI items for a rep- 
resentative sample of Anglophone Canadian students, for 
example, and found that some items reccived prediction 
ratios sulficiently different from those of Americans that the 
weighting for those items would be different in Canada. 
Form G word-pair question #31, *hearty-quiet" (Form M 
item #32) discriminates between those preferring Extraver- 
sion and those preferring Introversion in the United States. 
For the native English speakers in Casas’ Canadian sample, 
however, “quiet” was the overwhelming choice, and there- 
fore the weighting of scores on this item would be different. 


Oxlord Psychologists Press (Kendall &amp; McHenry, 1998) 
conducted research on 196 of Isabel Myers’ MBTI Form J 
items using a census-based national representative sample 
of adults (N = 1,634) in the United Kingdom. Based on this 
study, Betsy Kendall and Robert McHenry of Oxford Psy- 
chologists Press created a research version of the MBTI with 
item weights based on the U.K. sample responses. They 
then conducted best-fit type studies using Form G and their 
research version. The result of this comprehensive project 
was publication of the European English MBTI Step l: 87 
forced-choice items (63 Form G items plus 24 Form J 
items) scored using U.K. item weights. Their best-fit type 
studies indicate a significant increase in best-fit results for 
U.K. clients (from 6396 on Form G to 7296 on the European 
English MBTI Step 1), with the largest increase occurring on 
the Extraversion-Introversion dichotomy. 

Bathurst (personal communication, 1997) developed 
experimental item weights based on MBTI responses in 
samples of convenience in New Zealand. His analysis indi- 
cates that, based on his sample groups, about 4396 of the 
MBTI items would receive weights different from those 
assigned on the U.S. Form G scoring keys. When Bathurst 
compared overall MBTI results using U.S. and culture- 
specific scoring weights, however, MBTI type changed only 
slightly, with most of the changes occurring on dichotomies 
on which clients had low preference scores. 

Psychometrics Canada Ltd., MBTI distributor in Canada, 
and Australian Psychologists Press, MBTI distributor in Aus- 
tralia, are conducting research using representative samples 
in their cultures (Danielle Poirier, personal communication, 
1997; David Freeman, personal communication, 1997). 
These studies may result in culture-specific scoring weights. 
When such culturally adjusted scoring is not available, U.S. 
scoring keys can be used, with additional time and energy 
directed toward helping clients verify type results, especially 
for those with results near the midpoint. 


Summary 


Ideally, practitioners would be able to choose MBTI scoring 
options for multicultural clients that use item weights 
based on the social desirability of items in their culture. 
Practically, these are not widely available at the present 
lime. Fortunately, using scoring weights developed with 
U.S. samples does not appear to present a significant prob- 
lem for multicultural clients. 

Research conducted by Consulting Psychologists Press to 
create Form M resulted in replacing 4596 of the Form G items 
(often with minor wording changes). A number of items that 
achieved satisfactory prediction ratios in the United States in 
the mid-1970s, when Form G was created, did not meet the 
item selection criteria discussed in Chapter 7. Form M has 
not yet been tested with multicultural populations, but its 
reliabilities are higher than those for Form G with diverse 
U.S. populations, as is its reporting of best-fit type. Future 
research will indicate whether this new form also provides 
better results in multicultural settings. 


Administering and Interpreting 
the MBTI in Multicultural Settings 


The primary goal during administration is creating a climate 
that allows clients to report their truc or best-fit type prefer- 
ences when they respond to the MBTI items. The primary 
goal during interpretation is to assist clients in processing 
their MBTI results to decide on their best-fit type. The stan- 
dard instructions, outlined in Chapters 5 and 6, provide clear 
guidelines for practitioners. However, achieving these goals 
with clients from other cultures may require additional care. 


Questions About Administration 


Administering the MBTI in the U.S. is relatively straight- 
forward: the “directions” for answering the MBTI questions 
communicate clearly with most chents, and the guidelines 
in Chapter 5 of this manual provide the additional informa- 
tion practitioners may need to respond to client questions. 
However, some who use the MBTI in different cultures 
report administration issues that the multicultural practi- 
tioner will want to consider. 


I. Can I usc the standard instructions when adminis- 

tering the MBTI to clients in other cultures? 
Yes, with some modifications or additions. Most mul- 
ticultural practitioners use the standard instructions, 
but some also report developing instructions that 
communicate more effectively with their clients or 
spending extra time on parts of the instructions that 
may pose problems within their culture. 

For example, trainers at Oxford Psychologists 
Press (the U.K. distributor of the MBTI) have found 
(Kendall, personal communication, 1997) that the 
phrase “shocs-off self,” suggested in the 1985 Manual 
to convey the desired frame of mind for completing 
the Indicator, does not communicate well to their 
clients. They communicate the concept of “your nat- 
ural self” in other ways. 

Practitioners working with some Asian cultures 
(Park, 1996) report that the standard instruction 
"there are no right or wrong answers" requires addi- 
tional explanation for their clients, who are accus- 
tomed to receiving test results that compare them 
favorably or unfavorably with others. 

. Do cultural values raise particular issues | need to 

consider when administering the MBTI in other 
cultures? 
Yes, and these will vary as cultures differ. For exam- 
ple, in cultures in which position and age confer 
authority, special care needs to be taken about who is 
giving the Indicator or who may be participating in a 
group setting to ensure that clients feel comfortable 
responding from their individual perspectives. 

A cultural norm of agreeableness, or at least of not 
questioning, may also affect clients’ ability to report 


H2 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 375 


their own preferences. Practitioners using the MBTI in 
some Arab cultures report (Schmidt, personal com- 
munication, 1997) that these cultures favor “people 
acting in a way that pleases and never offends." 
Schmidt has found it particularly important to empha- 
size during administration that results are confidential 
and that the MBTI will be most helpful to everyone if 
respondents report what they really prefer. 

Cultures classified as “colleetivist,” in which group 
identity is more important than individual identity, 
may present special problems. De Beer (personal 
communication, 1997) and her colleagues are experi- 
menting with providing the following context for 
administration with indigenous people, who may find 
it difficult to respond outside of group norms: “We 
know you are a person well accepted by your com- 
munity. Would you, however, in doing this question- 
naire, go deep inside yourself to tell us who you know 
yourself to be, to tell us about your uniqueness.” 


. What ean 1 do to give clients from cultural minority 


groups the best opportunity to get MBTI results that 
are valid for them? 

De Beer (personal communication, 1997) expresscd 
her concerns about using the Indicator with clients 
whose race, gender, or ethnicity place them in a minor- 
ity or disadvantaged position within their larger cul- 
ture. De Beer raised the issue in relationship to Black 
South Africans, but the question has also been asked 
about reported type of African Americans (Battle, 1989, 
1994) and of other U.S. co-cultural groups (Salazar &amp; 
Sanchez, personal communication, 1997). Diliberio, 
Harrison, Sim, and Kim (1995) suggested that cultural 
values about gender and work roles affect womens abil- 
ity to report thcir preference for Thinking or Fceling in 
several cultures. And in some cultures, religious affilia- 
tion or sexual orientation may create similar problems. 

Clients who belong to a minority or disadvantaged 
group within their larger culture have often devel- 
oped an adaptive “coping” personality style that they 
use in interacting with the dominant culture. The 
concern is that they may be inclined to report that 
developed style rather than their actual underlying 
type preferences. 

Practitioners can address these issues directly dur- 
ing administration. Information such as the following 
may be helpful to these clients: 

Most people have developed a lot of different behaviors 

related to work and lamily roles they play or relationships 

they have. For some, the environment has required them 
to develop a coping personality style that is different in 
significant ways from who they might prefer to he. The 
purpose in taking the MBTI is to get at your own individ- 
ual preferences—apart from the roles you play, the skills 
you've gained, or the eoping behaviors you've developed. 

As you respond to the Indicator, try to answer as you 

would truly prefer—who you are outside of the expecta- 

tions of others. Remember, your results will belong to 
you and are for your use. You will share them with oth- 
ers only if you wish to. 





376 The Uses of Type 








Questions About Interpreting the MBTI 
and Verifying Type 


The MBTI personality inventory has value for clients 
when it provides additional self-understanding and when 
that knowledge can be used to improve their appreciation 
lor and interactions with others who are different from 
them. The interpretation and verification of MBTI results 
is the necessary starting point for this learning. For this 
process of understanding and applying type to be effec- 
tive, practitioners interpreting the MBTI in cultures other 
than their own need to be especially sensitive about cul- 
tural differences in training and learning styles and in the 
ways type may be experienced and expressed in the partic- 
ular culture. Assisting clients in making type useful in 
their lives requires interpreting type in ways that fit cul- 
turally for them. 


I. What kinds of general issues do I need to consider 

when structuring the feedback session for multicul- 
tural clients? 
The general principle is that practitioners need to be 
sensitive to cultural custcms and norms related to 
training, learning, and appropriate behavior. In cul- 
tures in which psychological testing is not customary 
and/or where training programs are unusual, practi- 
tioners need to be especially sensitive about creating a 
safe environment for interpretation and verification— 
in group and individual feedback. For group interpre- 
tation, this includes understanding power and au- 
thority relationships within the culture and taking 
care about who will participate. 

When using the MBTI in a culture other than their 
own, practitioners need to anticipate that participant 
behavior may differ from their usual experience and 
prepare themselves by seeking information about 
training and learning styles within that culture. For 
example, in some cultures, asking questions of the 
presenter and interjecting comments is considered 
impolite or aggressive behavior. 

Holstedes (1980) landmark study based on his 
survey of 116,000 employees of a large multinational 
firm in 50 countries identified two cultural differ- 
ences that may especially influence client expecta- 
tions and behavior related to receiving MBTI feed- 
back. Hofstede defined these as follows: “power 
distance," the degree to which a culture recognizes 
and respects authority relationships or, conversely, 
emphasizes equality of power; and "uncertainty 
avoidance," the degree to which a culture values sta- 
bility and rules to ensure stability or, conversely, 
encourages diversity of ideas and behavior. These two 
cultural differences will particularly affect the ways in 
which participants view their behavior within a group 
and their relationship to a group leader. 


2. Are there some specific issues related to practi- 


tioner style that I need to take into account when 
planning an MBTI feedback session? 

Yes. MBTI practitioners in other cultures report that 
clients in some cultures find the “American” style of 
training very fast paced and energetic. In fact, one 
group of Finnish clients (Barger, personal communi- 
cation, 1995) referred to their American trainers as 
“like actors.” In general, experience giving MBTI 
feedback in a variety of cultures seems to support 
modification of the pacing of the session, with clients 
requesting a slower pace than the rapid style charac- 
teristic of many U.S. trainers (Kendall, personal com- 
munication, 1997; Fitzgerald, personal communica- 
tion, 1997). U.S. trainers have found that giving 
participants regular pauses for individual reflection or 
for discussions with a partner seem helpful in these 
settings, and time for these kinds of activities needs to 
be built in when planning the session. 

Some cultures may require an altogether different 
approach to the feedback process from that familiar in 
the United States and other Western countries. De 
Beer (personal communication, 1997) reported that, 
when interpreting to professionals in South Africa, 
practitioners typically follow the general outline of 
sessions in the United States. However, indigenous 
people in rural areas in South Africa prefer to hear 
about type concepts “in the form of a meeting called 
an indaba,” perhaps facilitated by a church group. 
Interested people, led by the eldest of the community, 
have a discussion at a leisurely pace about, for exam- 
ple, Introversion. Then, the next week, they have a 
discussion about Extraversion, and so on. 

Taking account of the expectations and needs of 
clients when structuring feedback sessions requires 
both a willingness to adapt one’s normal approach 
and some information about the clients. Cultural 
anthropologists have produced a massive literature 
on other cultures that can assist trainers. 


. What resources are available 10 allow me to develop 


my knowledge of these issues in another culture? 

The following are some resources that we have found 

particularly helpful for the trainer crossing cultures: 
Understanding Cultures Influence on Behavior 
(Brislin, 1993) provides a basic summary of this 
issue in language accessible to those outside of 
cultural anthropology. 


Intercultural Communication: A Reader (Samovar &amp; 
Porter, 1991) identifies sensitive issues and pro- 
vides a wealth of information for communicating 
cffectively across cultural differences. 

Cultures Consequences: International Differences in 
Worh-Related Values (Hofstede, 1980) presents Hof- 
stedes analysis of his survey of cultural differences 





in 116,000 employees of a single multinational 
firm in 50 different countries; many of these differ- 
ences suggest ways to adapt training/presentation 
styles. 

Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind 
(Hofstede, 1991) especially focuses on cultural dif- 
ferences related to work. 


International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior 
(Adler, 1991) also addresses the influence of cul- 
tural differences within business organizations. 
These are considered “culture-general” approaches 
(Brislin, Cushner, Cherrie, &amp; Yong, 1986), that is, for 
the most part, they deal with general issues related to 
working in a different culture or communicating with 
people in another culture. For "culture-specific" in- 
formation, we recommend beginning with a “Cultur- 
gram," which can be obtained from the David M. 
Kennedv Center for International Studies at Brigham 
Young University. Culturgrams provide the practi- 
tioner with brief summaries of basic information 
about more than 100 different cultures. 
. Do I need to adjust my basic presentation of type 
information when working with multicultural 
clients? 
Yes. Practitioners using the MBTI cross-culturally 
have found that they need to modify their normal 
presentation because of a couple of important differ- 
ences: The specific examples or stories they use to 
illustrate type preference differences may not be famil- 
iar or may not be perceived in the same ways in differ- 
ent cultures; and type preferences may be experienced 
and expressed differently in another culture from the 
way they are within the practitioners own culture. 
Each of these differences requires developing ways to 
present type concepts and definitions that fit for the 
group to whom the practitioner is interpreting. 

Of course, adapting MBTI feedback to clients is a 
basic practitioner skill. Working within their own cul- 
ture, practitioners use type explanations and examples 
differently when they are interpreting to a family, for 
example, than when they are interpreting the same 
material to a work group. When interpreting within a 
country or culture different from one’s own, this prac- 
titioner skill needs to be used consistently. 

Some of the needed modifications are fairly obvi- 
ous. For example, illustrations of Sensing—Intuition 
differences commonly used in the United States— 
approaches to budgeting, descriptions ol time, ways of 
balancing checking accounts, and the like—frequently 
do not succeed in illustrating this difference in non- 
Western cultures. 

Somewhat less obvious but even more important 
necessary modifications come from the influence of 
cultural values and norms on the ways in which type 


307 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 





preferences are experienced by individuals and 
expressed in behavior in different cultures. Farlier 
sections of this chapter described differences in be- 
havior associated with Extraversion and Introversion 
in the United States and in the United Kingdom, and 
differences in the normal, type-related behaviors dis- 
plaved by ST] types in different cultures. Practitioners 
using the MBII in other cultures routinely report 
such behavioral differences. For example, Schmidt 
(personal communication, 1997) has found that 
some behaviors typically seen as related to the judg- 
ing function of Feeling in the United States are, 
amongst her Saudi Arabian clients, the cultural norm: 
valuing harmony and making decisions based on the 
effects of those decisions on other people. Her de- 
scriptions and examples of the Thinking and Feeling 
functions have had to be adjusted to communicate 
the differences effectively to these clients. 

Preparing by doing research on the values and 
norms of the culture within which one vill be inter- 
preting the MBTI is respectful and essential. Of even 
greater value, perhaps, is an attitude of exploration 
with clients. Experienced type practitioners have 
learned that their best examples come from listening 
to people of a particular type describe themselves; this 
is doubly true when working with clients from a cul- 
ture different from the practitioners own. 


. What kinds of type descriptions and supporting 


materials are available lor working with multicul- 
tural groups in verifying type? 

Type descriptions and supporting materials are a basic 
practitioner tool for verifying type. Research. with 
Form G in the United States has shown that clients 
agree with their reported type about 75% of the time, 
and when they disagree it is generally on one di- 
chotomy on which they had a low preference score 
(Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985). Comparisons of MBTI 
results and clients’ decisions about best-fit type from 
four other English-speaking countries show similar 
results (Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996). Best-fit type agreement 
information about Form M in other cultures is not yet 
available. 

Even if the MBTI identified type preferences this 
well in all cultures, 2096 to 2596 of clients would dis- 
agree with at least one preference reported. A full type 
description is the preferred tool for verifying client 
results and for clarifying a preference that the client 
questions. The overwhelming majority of type de- 
scriptions and supporting materials such as Introduc- 
tion to Type were first published in the United States 
and draw on the authors’ experiences with type as 
expressed by Americans. In spite of the American per- 
spective inevitably present in these, practitioners in 
other countries report that the type descriptions in 


3/8 The Uses of Ivpe 


Introduction to Type communicate well to their clients 
(Kendall, personal communication, 1997; D. Free- 
man, personal communication, 1997; P. Cauvin, per- 
sonal communication, 1997). 

Additionally, some type descriptions and support- 
ing materials based on the ways type is expressed in 
a particular culture have been developed or are in 
process. The best source of information about cultur- 
ally appropriate type descriptions and supporting 
materials is the distributor(s) of the MBTI personal- 
ity inventory in the country with which the practi- 
tioner is working. The Consulting Psychologists 
Press catalog lists international distributors and con- 
tact information. 


Summary 


For effective multicultural administration of the MBTI, 
practitioners not only need to be familiar with the standard 
instructions but also need to consider cultural values that 
may make it difficult for clients to respond according to 
those instructions. Practitioners are advised to clarify these 
issues through private interviews with individual clienis, 
asking about their reactions to the instructions. And it is 
particularly important to emphasize the customary instruc- 
tion: H you do not understand an item, just omit it and con- 
tinue. Clients are likely to get more accurate results if they 
have omitted items in which the meaning is not clear to 
them, in which they feel a conflict between the options, or 
in which they are uncomfortable choosing. 

MBTI interpretation and verification of results is the 
context in which type becomes of value to the client. For 
this process of understanding and personal application to 
be effective, practitioners using the MBTI in cultures other 
than their own need to be especially sensitive to differ- 
ences in training and learning styles and to differences in 
the ways type may be experienced and expressed relative to 
cultural values. 


Multicultural Type 
Distribution Samples 


Clients in multicultural settings want to know if the MBTI 
has been used with cultural groups such as theirs and, if it 
has, what kinds of type distributions seem characteristic 
(De Beer, personal communication, 1997; Kendall, personal 
communication, 1997). Practitioners currently have two 
basic sources for information on type research and practice 
in various cultures. The research services of the Center for 
Applications of Psychological Type (CAPT) in Gainesville, 
Florida, include a database that will produce type tables 
from different cultures and lists of articles, dissertations, 


and conference papers related to type in various cultures. 
Also, the chapter “Multicultural Applications" in MBTI 
Applications (Kirby &amp; Barger, 1996) is a summary of pub- 
lished research on type in different cultures. 

Most of the information available about type and culture 
is in the form of type tables of MBTI results in different cul- 
tures. Fortunately, that is often the kind of information 
clients request. Using type tables to illustrate group type 
distributions requires caution on the part of the practitioner 
for several reasons. 


B Anumber of factors are known to affect reported type on 
the MBTI: 

* Agc—Younger groups more often report higher per- 
centages of Extraversion and Perceiving than do com- 
parable older groups. 

* Education level—Groups with higher levels of educa- 
tion report higher percentages of Introversion than 
do groups with less education completed. 

* Occupation or field of study—Occupations, specific 
jobs within occupations, and chosen fields of study 
tend to attract people of similar types. 

* Gender—Males report higher percentages of prefer- 
ence for Thinking than do females. 

B Allof the type tables of large groups, including those in 
this chapter, are based on reported type, rather than veri- 
fied or best-fit type. 


The following cautions are recommended for practi- 
tioners in using type tables to hypothesize about national 
distributions. 


l. Carefully assess the group to identify any factors 
known to affect reported type that may be present in 
the group. Never assume that because the number of 
people is large, the group must therefore be representa- 
tive of the larger culture. 

. Recognize that reported type may be affected by a num- 
ber of other group or individual factors, including cul- 
tural values. We would expect that 2026-2546 of a large 
group would, through the verification process, choose 
a different type as their “best fit” than the one they 
reported on the MBTI. 


H2 


National Norming Samples of Type 


One of the most frequently asked questions during type 
interpretations is, What is the distribution of type prefer- 
ences in this country or culture? The 1985 MBTI Manual 
included several estimates of the distribution of types in the 
U.S.: Isabel Myers’ Pennsylvania high school students, the 
MBTI databank at the Center for Applications of Psycho- 
logical Type, and a study conducted by SRI International on 
American Values and Life Styles (VALS; Myers &amp; McCaul- 
ley, 1985, pp. 45-51). A national sample was analyzed by 
Hammer and Mitchell (1996). Each of these samples is an 


Table 1 4.1 


Uis. 


National Representative 
2 


African Americans 
Hispanics? 


U.K.4 


Us. 


National Representative 
2 


African Americans 
Hispanics? 


U.K.4 


U.S. 


National Representative 
2 


African Americans 
Hispanics? 


U.K.4 


US. 


National Representative 
2 


African Americans 


Hispanics? 


U.K.4 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Seuings 379 


National Normative Samples of Adults 





l 


2 p l 
Note: N = 3,009; See Appendix for a description of the sample; ^n = 363; See Appendix for a description of the sample; iim 340; See Appendix for 
a description of the sample; tn = 1.634, Adults in the United Kingdom, MBTI Step | (European English) reported type. 


Source: INauonal representative sample; 2 ubsample of national representative sample, subsample of national representative sample; tkendall &amp; Mc Henry, 1998. 


estimate of U.S. distributions because the studies include 
factors known to affect MBTI results: age and development 
(high school sample), education and occupation (CAPT 
databank), and response/return rate (VALS and Hammer &amp; 
Mitchell), with the latter two studies most closely resem- 
bling a normative sample. 

In 1996 and 1997, Consulting Psychologists Press spon- 
sored a national normative sampling of MBTI results as 
part of the research for the new MBTI Form M. Table 14.1 
displays the results of this weighted national sample, 
reporting separately on African Americans and Hispanics 
included within the larger national representative sample. 
During the same period, Oxford Psvchologists Press spon- 
sored a similar normative sampling of MBTI Form G 
results in the United Kingdom. This U.K. type distribution 
is also displayed in Table 14.1. 


The most notable pattern in all the normative samples 
(VALS, CPP's Form M sample, and OPP5 Form G sample) 
is the predominance of ISJ and ES] types, the four types 
that, in type dynamics terms, introvert their Sensing func- 
tion. These four types total 4496-5296 of the people in each 
of the samples. When using such data, practitioners need 
to remember the cautions listed above, including that 
these samples are based on reported type, rather than best- 


fit type. 
Type Tables by Age and Education Level 


Researchers have produced several studies of type distribu- 
ions in groups that may be presumed to be somewhat com- 
parable, and such samples may provide tentative projections 
of national type distributions. Tables 14.2 and 14.3 show 
examples of such research. 


380 The Uses of Type 


Table 14.2 Multicultural Type Distribution Samples of High School Students 


Pennsylvania! 


Australia? 
New Zealand? 


Singapore? 


Pennsylvania! 


Australia? 
New Zealand? 
Singapore? 


Pennsylvania! 
Australia? 
New Zealand? 
Singapore? 


Pennsylvania! 


Australia? 
New Zealand? 


Singapore? 


ENFP 


7.6076 
10.11% 
5.7% 
5.5% 





l 


: Qe E03 
Note: N = 9,320; N = 3,373, 


4 


N=993, Nz 1,733. 


Source: I Myers &amp; McCaulley, 1985; 2Macdaid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz, 1986; ?Bathurst, 1995; "Lim, 1994 


Again, practitioners need to remember that these sam- 
ples rellect reported type in the sample groups and that stu- 
dent groups in different cultures may vary significantly in 
socioeconomic background. 


Multicultural Databases 


Organizations in several different countries have MBTI type 
databases that comprise comparable groups: educated, pro- 
fessional adults who have participated in type training 
programs in organizational and religious settings. Table 14.4 
shows type distributions reported by these organizations. 

Though the samples presented here are roughly compa- 
rable, practitioners need to remember that these are sam- 
ples of convenience and should not be assumed to indicate 
national tvpe distributions. 


Type Tables by Occupational Group 


Data about type distributions within occupations are avail- 
able for many more cultures, and they demonstrate patterns 
that allow greater interpretation. Samples of occupational 
groups consistently show similar type distribution patterns 


in a wide variety of cultures. Table 14.5 uses the example of 
managers in organizations in different cultures. 

Type distribution information about managers in various 
cultures consistently reports an overrepresentation of the 
Thinking Judging combination. Practitioners and clients can 
use this information to explore issues such as the organiza- 
tional values that lead 10 the selection of Thinking Judging 
types for managerial positions or the effects on organizations 
of having a particular type perspective so dominant in man- 
agement (Fitzgerald &amp; Kirby, 1997b). Type distributions of 
tcachers, religious workers, psychologists, police officers, 
and other occupational groups also tend to show similarities 
across cultures and may be used to explore similar issues. 


Summary 


Practitioners who use the MBTI multiculturally need to pre- 
pare themselves for client questions about use of the MBTI 
and psychological type in their culture and in similar cul- 
tures. They also need to be prepared to respond to questions 
about type distributions. Fortunately, such information is 
available from a number of sources referred to in this chapter. 


Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 581 


Table 14.3 Multicultural Type Distribution Samples of University Students 


IST] ISFJ 

U.S. 

Traditional Age Males! 12.48% 5.44% 

Traditional Age Females? 6.86% 11.47% 
Canadian 

Ontario Francophones? 18.7% 8.8% 

Anglophone Canadians‘ 10.3% 5.576 
French? 15.376 3.9% 
U.S. 

Traditional Age Males! 


Traditional Age Females? 
Canadian 

Ontario Francophones? 
Anglophone Canadians? 


French? 


ENFP 

U.S. 
Traditional Age Males! 6.2676 
Traditional Age Females? 11.74% 
Canadian 
Ontario Francophones? 4.7% 
Anglophone Canadians? 10.0% 
French? 4.3% 


ESF] 


U.S. 
Traditional Age Males! 5.46% 
Traditional Age Females? 15.05% 

Canadian 
Ontario Francophones? 5.9% 
Anglophone Canadians? 7.3% 

French? 0.9% 





Noré: IN = 12,637; 7N = 14.519: 2N = 1.024% 'N = 913: °N = 672. 


Source: | Data from the CAPT-MBTI Atlas, 1986. Gainesville, FL’ Center for Applications of Psychological Type Data from one of a senes of tables from the CAPT-MBTI 
Data Bank of MBTI records submitted to CAPT for computer scoring between 1971 and December 1982. The subjects were males who, at the ume of testing, were 
between 18 and 25 years of age inclusive, enrolled in school and attending college. This sample was drawn from 55,971 Form F records and 32,671 Form G records 
These two databanks comprised 56% females and +4% males. Education level completed was 6% some grade school, 30% high school diploma, 25% some college. 18% 
bachelor’s degree, 11% masters degree, 3% doctoral or postdoctoral work, and 6% unknown. Age group percentages were 11% under 18, 29% 18 to 20, 12% 21 to 24, 
10% 25 to 29, 16% 30 to 39, 10% 40 to 49. 5% 50 to 59 2% 60 plus, and 5% unknown, “Data from the CAPT-MBTI Atlas, 1986. Gainesville, FL. Center for Applicauons 
of Psychological Type See footnote 1, Casas, 1990, *Casas, 1990; Casas, 1990. 


382 The Uses of Type 


Table 14.4 Selected Multicultural Database Samples 
















IST] ISFJ 
Uis. 


Males! 
Females? 





15.4576 4.42% 
9 S 10.30% 
Canada 
20.71% 6.57% 
15.78% 8.53% 
14.175 10.476 

19.9% 6.04% 
21.57% 8.18% 





Francophone? 

Anglophone‘ 
New Zealand? 
South Africa* 


Korea' 


U.S. 


Males! 
Females? 
Canada 
Francophone? 
Anglophone‘ 
New Zealand? 
South Africa 


Korea' 


U.S. 
Males! 
Females? 
Canada 
Francophone? 
Anglophone‘ 
New Zealand 
South Africa® 


Korea’ 


EST] ESF] . ENT] 





U.S. 
Males! 
Females? 
Canada 
Francophone? 
















14.01% 
10.07% 


4.39% 
10.66% 


6.93% 
5.17% 












15.02% 
11.12% 
8.2% 
23.22% 
14.22% 


3.57% 
5.46% 
5.6% 
4.9% 
5.60% 


4.01% 
7.0576 
4.876 

8.6676 
3.4576 


Anglophone‘ 
New Zealand? 
South Africa? 
Korea' 





ea Gra a aa ee me NNNM 
Ww. 24,82 ES 9 m NC 6 E 
Note: “N= 15,791, ^N = 16,880; ^N = 2071; 'N = 122280; ?N = 11,868; °N = 6,452; 'N = 13,308. 


Source. I Data from the CAPT-MBTI Atlas, 1986. Gainesville, FL. Center for Applications of Psychological Type. Data from one of a series of tables from the CAPT-MBTI 
Data Bank of MB11 records submitted to CAPT for computer scoring between March 1978 and December 1982. This sample was a suhset of the Form G datahank of 
32,956 used in the occupation analyses Educatnon level completed in this databank was 6% some grade school, 42% high school diploma, 25% some college, 12% hache- 
lors degree, 8% master's degree, 4% doctoral or postdoctoral work, and 3% unknown Age group percentages were 14% under 18, 40% 18 to 20, 11% 21 to 24, 7% 25 to 
29, 1196 30 to 39, 796 40 to 49, 4% 50 to 59, 196 60 plus, and 5% unknown Used with permission; 2Data from the CAPT-MBTI Atlas, 1986. Gainesville, FE: Center for 
Applications of Psychological Type. Data from one of a series of tables from the CAP I-MBTI Data Bank ol MBTI records submitted to CAPT for computer scoring 
between March 1978 and Decemher 1982. This sample was a suhsct of the Form G databank of 32,956 used in the occupation analyses. Education level completed in 
this databank was 6% some grade school, 35% high school diploma, 24% some college, 17% bachelor’s degree, 11% master’s degree, 2% doctoral or postdoctoral work, 
and 5% unknown. Age group percentages were 13% under 18, 27% 18 to 20, 8% 21 to 24, 9% 25 to 29, 18% 30 to 39, 10% 40 to 49, 696 50 to 59, 2% 60 plus, and 7% 
unknown. Used with permission, Park, 1996; Park, 1996; Bathurst, 1995. 07ietsmann, 1996; 7 im &amp; Kim, 1993 


Table 14.5 


U.S.! 
Canada? 
Mexico? 
Japan 
Top Managers? 
CEOs? 
England 


Latin America? 


U.s.! 
Canada? 
Mexico? 
Japan 
Top Managers* 
CEOs 
England® 


Latin America? 


U.S.! 
Canada? 
Mexico? 
Japan 
Top Managers‘ 
CEOs? 
England 


Latin America’ 


U.S.! 
Canada? 
Mexico? 
Japan 
Top Managers‘ 
CEOs? 
England 


Latin America? 


Multicultural Type Distribution Samples of Managers 





Uses of Type in Multicultural Settings 


383 


a M IUGTCINCHSCNNV a ee Ea CL 0E 0504 7 


» 
Note: 'N = 37,549. ^N 


= 3.798: °N = 1.010: *N = 56, ?N = 118: N = 89; ^N = 206. 


Source’ l Osborn. Osborn, &amp; Twillman, 1996; Osborn, Osborn, &amp; Twillman, 1990, 3Osborn, Osborn, &amp; Twillman, 1996; *Macdaid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz, 1986, 
?Macdaid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz, 1986; 9Macdaid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz, 1986, ' Macdaid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz, 1986 


384 The Uses of Type 


Some cautions apply to interpretation of type tables: In all 
the examples in this section, the samples are presumed to be 
comparable but not exact; for example, even where students 
arc at the same level of sehooling, diflerent percentages of 
people participate at that level in each of the countries; and 
the multicultural databases presented are samples of conve- 
nience. The temptation for clients is to overinterpret type dis- 
tributions; thus practitioners need to emphasize the partial 
and tentative nature of most of the data available. Practition- 
ers and their clients can identify patterns but need to inter- 
pret with caution. 


Conclusion 


This chapter has emphasized differences when the MBTI is 
used in multicultural settings and cautions about its use 
with people culturally different from those with whom it 


was developed. It is also important to recognize the positive 
experience of practitioners using the MBTI outside of the 
United States: 


|t: 


bh 


Both psychological type and the MBTI have been 
used effectively in dozens of cultures, some very dif- 
ferent from U.S. middle-class culture. 


. Research and practitioner experience in using the 


MBTI multiculturally is overwhelmingly positive— 
clients recognize the patterns identified by psycho- 
logical type, give examples of their use of preferences 
from their own experience, and find types identifica- 
tion of normal differences very helpful in increasing 
their understanding of themselves and others. 

The perspective and ethics associated with psycho- 
logical type and the MBTI, summarized by Myers as 
"the constructive use of differences," make type and 
the MBTI particularly useful in cross-cultural work 
and in multicultural settings, where respect for hu- 
man diversity is of paramount importance. 


Sources and Descriptions of 
Samples of the 1998 Revision 


Description of National Sample and 
National Representative Sample 


National Sample 


A stratified random sampling procedure was used to collect 
the national sample. This procedure, collected in 1996, was 
designed to yield a sample that would be representative of the 
U.S. population. However, the actual sample does not match 
U.S. census data. Caucasian females are overrepresented, and 
African American males are underrepresented, relative to the 
U.S. census data. Further, ethnic categories for people of 


American Indian. Asian/Pacific Islander, or Eskimo/Aleut 
descent were not available. 


National Representative, 
or Weighted, Sample 


The national representative, or weighted, sample was 
developed to approximate the U.S. population in terms of 
gender and ethnicity (African American, Caucasian, His- 
panic/ Latino). Based on U.S. census data, weights for gen- 
der and ethnicity were applied to the national sample 
(described above) to yield the national representative, or 
weighted, sample. 


385 


386 MBTI Manual 

















Age Gender 
Sample N Type of Sample M(SD) Female Male 
Test-Retest Reliability 
Consulting Psychologists Press 50 Employees 36(9) 6876 3276 
Public Utilities Company 258 Employees 44(8) S076 50% 
Virginia Commonwealth University 116 College Students 25(8) 82% 18% 
Validity 
The Ball Foundation 92 College Students 24(6) 5576 4576 
Employee Career Enrichment Program. 98 University Employees 41(9) 8976 11% 
University of Minnesota 
Fairview Health Services Career Resource Center 261 Health Care Employees 4| 85% 14% 
lowa State University 2/9 College Students 21(4) 71% 29% 
Middle Tennessee State University Counseling 198 College Freshmen 19(2) 5676 4476 
&amp; Testing Center 
Asian/Pacific American Learning Resource Center, 313 College Freshmen 19 60% 40% 
University of Minnesota 
National Sample 3,036 Stratified Random 47(17) 5476 4676 
National Representative Sample 3,009 Representative “Weighted” 46(17) 5126 4976 
Trinity Lutheran Church, Minnesota IOI Community 48(18) 61% 39% 
EQI Sample ler MBA Students/Adults 34(7) 24% 72% 
CR! Sample 157 Working Adults 40(11) 6776 31% 
Ethnicity 
African Asian Latino/ Missing/ 
Caucasian American American Latina Other Instruments Completed 
Test-Retest MBTI Form M 
Consulting Psychologists Press na na na na na 
Public Utilities Company 156 4 2 56 40 
Virginia Commonwealth University na na na na na 
Validity 
The Ball Foundation | 63 17 | l 10 Subscales of Ball Aptitude Battery 
Employee Career Enrichment 87 2 | | 6 Work Environment Scale, Ideal and 
Program, University of Minnesota Real forms 
Fairview Health Services Career 243 0 | | 16 Masloch Burnout Inventory, Values 
Resource Center Scole, Solience Inventory 
lowa State University 236 E 10 7 15 Strong Interest Inventory, Skills 
Confidence Inventory, Career Factors 
Inventory, Adjective Check List, Positive 
and Negotive Affectivity Scale 
Middle Tennessee State University [27 44 2 3 22 Strong Interest Inventory, Career 
Counseling &amp; Testing Center Factors Inventory, Problem Solving 
Inventory, Social Skills Inventory 
Asian/Pacific American 0 23 251 20 I9 MBTI Form M 
Learning Resource Center, 
University of Minnesota 
National Sample 2,687 RE) na 106 106 FIRO-B, CPP Survey 
National Representative Sample 2:203 363 na 340 103 
Trinity Lutheran Church, Minnesota 89 0 0 0 12 MBTI Forms M and G 
EQI Sample na na na na na Emotional Quotient Inventary 
CRI Sample 107 10 10 10 20 Coping Resources Inventary 


Note: All sample groups completed the MBTI Form M. 


Chapter | 


l. 


NM 


The letter “N” is used to identify Intuition because "P" is 
used to label Introversion. It should also be noted that Jung 
used the term sensation in his writings rather than Myers 
preferred term Sensing. 


. A low to moderate correlation has been consistently found 


between the S-N and J-P dichotomies of the MBTI. Myers 
believed, as do many current type experts, that this relation- 
ship represents a real and natural association between the 
two dichotomies and is not simply attributable to measure- 
ment or sample error. Chapter 7 further explicates the ratio- 
nale for this relationship. 


Chapter 3 


l: 


D 


Myers and Briggs also use both of these terms, attitude and 
orientation, as equivalent when referring to Extraversion 
and Introversion. 


. Myers and Briggs use the term process interchangeably with 


Jungs term function. In his writings, Jung occasionally used 
the term process as denoting the same thing as function. The 
MBTI manual treats the two terms as equivalent but for clar- 
ity and consistency uses the term function in most instances. 


. This method of determining type dynamics—that is, which 


of the functions is dominant, auxiliary, and so on—is a dis- 
tinctive feature of the MBTI. The Jungian Type Survey 
(Wheelwright, Wheelwright, &amp; Buehler, 1964), which pur- 
ports to elicit Jungs psychological types, does not include a 
fourth dichotomy such as J-P Dominant versus auxiliary 
functions are determined by a “higher score” criterion. See 
Chapters 5 and 9 for a discussion of comparative clarity of 
preference for MBTI dominant and auxiliary functions. 


. Intellectual tradition and various research approaches have 


associated creativity with an Intuitive preference. When cre- 
ativity is defined as the creation of something new that has 
not existed before, one can appropriately describe Sensing 
perception as "creative" as well. The process whereby Sens- 
ing develops something new may be the step-by-step, 
methodical, and detailed procedure characteristic of intro- 
verted Sensing, or the extraverted Sensing process of creating 
something new by adapting and combining whatever ele- 
ments are available in the current situation. The Sensing 
process is in contrast to the flashes of insight that we associ- 
ate with Intuition. However, the product created through 
either introverted or extraverted Sensing may be a new one 
that has not existed before. A likely example of introverted 


Tl 


10. 


Notes 


Sensing creativity may be Thomas Edisons inventions 
involving electricity, which reportedly resulted from a long 
series of trial-and-error efforts to find an effective conductor. 


. Measures of “shyness” are typically correlated with various 


measures of Introversion, including Introversion as elicited 
on the MBTI This is an inevitable consequence of the over- 
lap in content of test items used to identify Introversion and 
shyness. However, shyness and Introversion are not neces- 
sarily related. Some Extraverts describe themselves as 
socially shy, and some Introverts describe themsclves as 
socially outgoing or gregarious. The E-I subscales of the 
Step I] Expanded Interpretive Report (EIR) shed some light 
on this observation. 


. When referring to the two attitudes specified by Jung, 


therefore, only Extraversion and Introversion are meant. 
Myers and Briggs referred to their added dichotomy of 
Judging versus Perceiving as attitudes or orientations. The 
MBTI manual uses both of these terms interchangeably in 
referring to the Extraversion versus Introversion attitudes or 
orientations, and the Judging versus Perceiving attitudes or 
orientations. 


. This view was implied in some of Jungs writings (sce previ- 


ous discussion on page 28). Two other hypotheses have 
been advanced. One (Grant, Thompson, &amp; Clark, 1983) 
sees the tertiary as taking the same attitude as the dominant 
function; the other (Quenk, 1993) favors the notion that 
the tertiary may take either attitude, depending on circum- 
stances or individual habits. Toward the end of her life, 
Isabel Myers appeared to favor this latter view (Quenk, 
1993; see footnote 3.8, p. 276). 


. The approach taken in the Jungian Type Survey (Whecl- 


wright, Wheelwright, &amp; Buehler, 1964) is that the orienta- 
tion or attitude of both dominant and auxiliary functions is 
to the preferred attitude of Extraversion or Introversion. In 
this system, only the unconscious inferior function is ori- 
ented toward the less-preferred attitude. 


. An inevitable psychometric consequence of differential type 


development in young people, as well as incomplete devel- 
opment in an indeterminate percentage of adults, is that 
reliability estimates appear lower than would be the casc if 
all respondents were mature and well developed in their 
type. See Chapter 8 for further explanation of this impor- 
tant aspect of type development theory. 

Research on brain activity patterns (see Chapter 9) provides 
emerging empirical evidence for the innate nature of type 
preferences. 


387 


388 MBTI Manual 
Chapter 4 
l. These descriptions of the four temperaments were devel- 
oped by L. V. Berens and appear in Berens, L. V., Under- 
standing Yourself and Others, An Introduction to Tempcra- 
ment. Huntington Beach, CA: Telos Publications, 1998. The 
material was adapted with her permission. 
Chapter 5 
l. Word-pair nems are probably a hule more difficult. 
Presently there is no method for determining reading level 
of such items. 
Chapter 10 
1. MBTI Applications: A Decade of Research on the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator (Hammer, 1996b) provides a summary of the 
research included in the 1985 MBTI Manual and a detailed 
review of research published in the subsequent 10 years. 
Where available, new studies not covered in MBTI Applica- 
tions are included in this chapter. 
2. 


Notc that more recent representative samples as discussed 
in Chapters 2 and 7 indicate a different proportion of Intro- 
verts in the U.S. population. Application of these newer 
cstimates may affect this statistical result. 


tv 


Chapter 14 
E 


The term multicultural in this chapter refers to using the 
MBI] with diverse cultural groups or with individual 
clients lrom diverse cultural backgrounds. Cross-cultural 
and international (the terms generally used in this chapter) 
refer to using the MBTI in any country or culture different 
from those of the group with whom the instrument was 
developed 

Ihe MBII Form G was developed primarily with middle- 
class White Americans. Form M development included 
testing on a national representative sample in the U.S. based 
on census data and therefore includes a more diverse popu- 
lation. Form M has not yet been tested or used in cultures 
outside the U.S., so the data in this chapter are from use of 
Form G except where noted (Table 14.1). 
Two notable exceptions are cultural anthropologists Richard 
Brislin and Gary Weaver, who attended, presented at, and 
participated in panels at “Psychological Type and Culture— 
East and West: A Multicultural Research Symposium," Janu- 
ary 1993, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii. 
Their participation and comments were in the nature of 
“explorations,” and neither indicated acceptance or evi- 
dence of psychological types universality. 


achievement measure. An assessment of competence in an area, 
such as the grade obtained after a course of study; a sum- 
mary of the grades received in obtaining an educational 
dcgrce, such as the grade point average; scores on tests that 
assess the degree to which a respondent has learned a par- 
ticular skill or body of information. 

analysis of variance (ANOVA). A statistical analysis used to deter- 
mine the effects of one or more categorical independent 
variables on the variance of a continuous dependent vari- 
able. The analysis indicates which of the independent vari- 
ables have a significant effect on the variance of the depen- 
dent variable and also identifies any statistical interactions 
among the independent variables that may affect the depen- 
dent variable. 

ANOVA. See analysis of variance. 

a posterior. A probability that has been revised based on prior 
information; a probability that is conditional on a prior 
event or on prior knowledge. 

APT. See Association for Psychological Type. 

aptitude measure. A test or other device designed to assess a per- 
sons potential, either for learning in general (¢.g., an intelli- 
gence test) or for learning in a specific area (e.g., a test of 
mechanical aptitude). Aptitude measures are in contrast to 
achievement measures, which assess acquired knowledge. 

Association for Psychological Type (APT). A membership organi- 
zation devoted to promoting the ethical use of psychologi- 
cal type through training workshops, international and 
regional conferences, and local chapters. 

asymptote. A straight line approached by a given curve as one of 
the variables that defines the curve approaches infinity, the 
theoretical upper or lower limit of such a curve. A curve is 
asymptotic if it approaches such a limit. 

attitude. Extraversion and Introversion in Jungs theory. In MBTI 
usage, the term attitude also refers to the Judging-Perceiving 
dichotomy. In MBTI usage, interchangeable with the term 
orientation. 

auxiliary function or auxiliary process. The function or process 
that is second in importance and that provides balance (a) 
between perception and judgment and (b) between Extra- 
version and [ntroversion. 

best-fit type. The type that a respondent has verified as providing 
the most accurate description of him- or herself, based on 
self-knowledge. Contrast reported type and true type. 

best-fit type study. A study of a sample of 2,116 respondents to 
the MBTI, obtained from a variety of type workshops and in 
other settings over a period of several ycars; respondents 


Glossary 


provided assessments of their best-fit types for comparison 
with their reported types. 

CAPT. See Center for Applications of Psychological Type, Inc. 

CAPT MBTI Data Bank. A research bank of over 800,000 
computer-scored MBTI answer sheets collected from 197] 
to the present. 

Center for Applications of Psychological Type, Inc (CAPT). A 
nonprofit public organization for education, research, and 
services relating to the MBTI, including training workshops 
and publications. 

chi-square test. A statistical test used to determine the degree of 
independence or relationship between nominal and cate- 
gorical variables; the test involves a comparison of the 
observed frequencies in each category with the expected 
frequencies and determines the probability that the differ- 
ence between these frequencies occurred by chance. 

classical test theory (CTT). A model used to construct, score, and 
evaluate instruments designed to measure individual differ- 
ences. Classical test theory assumes that every individual 
has some hypothetical but unobservable truc score on a 
given variable, but we estimate this true score through an 
observed score on a measuring instrument. Because the 
observed score is only an estimate of the hypothetical true 
score, CTT uses methods for determining the reliability of 
observed scores. CTT also includes estimates of an items 
difficulty and of its discriminating ability. The forms of the 
MBTI that preceded Form M applied classical test theory in 
scale development, scoring, and evaluation of the forms. 

coefficient alpha. A measure of internal consistency reliability 
based on the average inter-item correlation and the number 
of items on the scale. Also called Cronbach’ alpha. 

Comfort Scales. The seven scales of the Type Differentiation Indi- 
cator (TDI) that are obtained through the scoring of MBT! 
Form J. 

Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc. (CPP). Publisher of the 
MBTI and related MBTI materials as well as a number of 
other psychological instruments. 

continnons score. On forms preceding Form M, a transformation 
of a preference score such that the midpoint is set at 100 and 
the prefcrence score for E, S, T, or J is subtracted from 100 
and preference scores for I, N, E or P are added to 100. On 
Form M, the continuous scores are the theta scores from thc 
IRT scoring program. Such scores are used for research. It is 
not recommended that they be interpreted to respondents. 

continuum. A characteristic or property that varies in size or 
amount, cannot be subdivided except by arbitrary division, 


389 


390 MBTI Manual 


and is measured bv a series of numbers that are ordered in 
size from small to large or vice versa. The increments between 
numbers are the same size all along the continuum and repre- 
sent equal amounts of the characteristics being measured. In 
personality measures, the categories of Likert scales are 
assumed to be a continuum, for example, a seven-point rating 
scale ranging from very dissatisfied to very satisfied. 

CPP Scc Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc. (CPP). 

CTT. See classical test theory. 

dependent variable. In a research study or statistical analysis, the 
dependent variable is the one that is acted upon (influenced 
by) other variables. Whether a given variable is considered 
to be independent or dependent may vary depending on the 
study design or the analysis being done. 

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM). The official manual 
defining psychiatrie and psychological diagnoses. 

dichotomy. Literally, a division into two distinct parts. In type the- 
ory, the two parts are assumed to identily opposite domains 
of mental functioning or attitudes. Dichotomous con- 
struets differ qualitatively as well as quantitatively from 
continuous variables. The four dichotomies of the MBTI 
are Extraversion-Introversion, Sensing-Intuition, Thinking- 
Feeling, and Judging—Pereeiving. 

DIE See differential item functioning. 

differential item functioning (DIF). An analysis based on item 
response theory that is designed to determine whether a 
test item performs similarly or differently across demo- 
graphie subgroups (e.g., males versus females, or younger 
versus older subjects). 

differentiation. The process of separation whereby distinet parts 
emerge from an intermingled single entity. A differentiated 
type function is one that is separate and exists by itself, so that 
it can operate on its own without being mixed up with or 
contaminated by any other function. 

dominant function or dominant process. The function or process 
that is assumed to be the frst developed, most conscious, 
and most differentiated, and which becoines the governing 
force dominating and unifying ones life. 

DOR. See dropout ratio. 

dropout ratio (DOR). A selection ratio in which the ratio com- 
pares the proportion of a type that drops out of an occupa- 
tion, program, or other group being studied to the propor- 
tion in the original population. 

E. See Extraversion. 

EAR. See Expanded Analysis Report. 

EIR. See MBTI Step II Expanded Interpretive Report. 

elementary interactions. Interactions between two or more of the 
four type letters, excluding the type dynamics interactions. 

elementary school. In the U.S., grades one through four; the age 
range of elementary school children is approximately 6 
through I0. 

Expanded Analysis Report (EAR). An earlier name for the MBTI 
Step II Expanded Interpretive Report. 

Expanded Interpretive Report. See MBTI Step l Expanded Inter- 
pretive Report. 

Extraversion (E). The attitude (orientation) that identifies the 
direction and flow of energy to the outer world. 

Extravert, Extraverted type. An individual who has a preferenee 
for the Extraverted atutude over the Introverted attitude. 

E See Feeling. 

factor analysis. A method of ereating groupings of items or factors 
that are highly related to each other and distinet from other 
groups ol items (factors); an underlying theme or construct 
unifies the items that make up a factor. A method of discov- 
ering or determining the groupings or factors inherent in à 
set of items or variables. A statistical technique designed to 


find the variables or items that are most related to one 
another and that are distinct from other groups. Exploratory 
factor analvsis makes no assumptions about the underlying 
structure among the variables; confirmatory factor analysis, 
a much more rigorous procedure, tests for a specific 
hypothesized structure in the item set. 

Feeling (F). Of the two opposite judging functions, the one by 
which decisions are made through ordering ehoiees in 
terms of personal values. 

Fecling types. People who prefer Feeling over Thinking as a way 
of making judgments. 

lorced-choice format. A style of asking questions that requires the 
respondent to choose one ol the two options presented. It is 
the method used for all MBTI items. 

Form AV. A discontinued self-seorable form of the MBTI that con- 
sisted of the first 50 items of Form G. The reliability of 
Form AV relative to Form G was unacceptable, and it has 
not been in use for a number of years. 

Form G. This form preceded Form M as the standard form and 
also has a self-scorable version. 

Form J. This is the current rescarch form and takes the place of the 
previous Form E whieh has been discontinued. Form J is 
used for MBTI Step III, which includes the seven Comfort 
Scales of the Type Differentiation Indicator (TDI) 

Form K. This form contains all items needed to score for four- 
letter type as well as additional items needed to yield the 
Step II Expanded Interpretive Report. 

Form M. This is the standard form of the MBTI for general use. A 
self-seorable version of Form M is available. 

function or process. One of the four basic mental processes of 
Sensing, Intuition, Thinking, and Feeling. 

function pairs. The pairs ereated by combining each of the two 
perceiving functions with each of the two judging fune- 
tions. There are four function pairs—ST, SE, NF, NT. 

GH procedure. A multiple comparison procedure for comparing 
several means post hoe in an ANOVA when the variances of 
the groups are unequal. 

grade point average. A measure of scholastic achievement that 
averages a students grades over a designated time period, 
such as an academic semester, total years in a degree pro- 
gram, and so forth. 

high school. In the United States, the school that teaches students 
in grades 9 through 12, whose ages are approximately 14 
through 18. Graduation from high school is required for 
admission to a college or university. 

l. See Introversion. 

ICC. See item characteristics curve. 

independent variable. In a researeh study or statistieal analysis, 
the independent variable is one whose influenee on another 
variable is being studied. Whether a given variable is con- 
sidered to be independent or dependent may vary depend- 
ing on the study design or the analysis being done. 

inferior funetion. The funetion opposite to the dominant fune- 
tion, also ealled the fourth funetion or least-preferred fune- 
tion. The inferior funetion is assumed to be the most uneon- 
scious, least experienced, and least differentiated of the 
functions, serving as a potential source of difficulties as well 
as growth. 

internal consistency reliability. A measure of the reliability or 
consistency with which a group of respondents answer the 
items that make up a scale. See also split-half reliability and 
coelficient alpha. 

Introversion. The attitude (orientation) that identifies the diree- 
tion and flow of attention and energy to the inner world 

Introvert, Introverted type. An individual who has a preference 
for the Introverted attitude over the Extraverted attitude. 


Glossary 391 





Intuition (N). Of the two opposite perceiving functions, the one 
that is concerned with meanings, relationships, patterns, 
and possibilities. 

Intuitive type. A person who prefers Intuition over Sensing as a 
way of perceiving. 

IRT. See item response theory. 

IRT scoring. The method of scoring used with Form M of the 
MBTI, which involves looking at a persons response to each 
item on a scale and then determining the value of theta that 
is the most likely or probable value to have produced such a 
set of item responses. If the most likely theta is to the right 
of the midpoint, the preference is I, N, E, or P, depending on 
the scale. If the most likely theta is to the left of the mid- 
point, the preference is E, S, I, or J, depending on the scale. 
Theta is then converted to a preference clarity index to 
arrive at the numerical portion of the result. 

{sabel Briggs Myers Memorial Library. A collection of over 2,700 
MBII-related books, articles, dissertations, journals, and 
other materials. The library is housed at the Center for 
Applications of Psychological Type (CAPT) in Gainesville, 
Florida. Library materials are available to interested per- 
sons. An updated bibliography that currently lists over 
6,000 entries is also available. 

item characteristic curve (ICC). In item response theory, a curve 
describing a test item. It shows the rate at which an item 
would hypothetically be endorsed by people who have vary- 
ing levels of the characteristic in question. Ihe rate of item 
endorsement varies from 0 to 100% and is plotted on the ver- 
tical axis of the curve. The horizontal axis shows levels of the 
psychological characteristic, lor example, scores on a test. 

item response theory (IRT). An approach to measurement that is 
concerned with modeling the relationship between item 
responses and the underlying characteristic that is assessed 
by the scale or test that the item is designed to measure. It can 
be used to select items for a test and/or to score the items. IRT 
is a tool of modern test theory. Contrast classical test theory. 

J. Sce Judging. 

Judging (J). The attitude (orientation) that indicates that either 
Thinking or Feeling is the preferred way of dealing with the 
outer world and is likely to appear in observable behavior. 

judging functions. Thinking and Feeling. 

Judging type. A person who has a judging attitude, that is, prefers 
to use a judging function (Thinking or Feeling) rather than 
a perceiving function (Sensing or Intuition) when dealing 
with the outer world 

judgment. A term that refers to the process of making a decision 
or coming to a conclusion. 

Likeri scale. An item or question format in which a respondent is 
presented with a statement and is then asked to select from 
a number of choices that indicate his or her degree of agree- 
ment with the statement (e.g., strongly disagree to strongly 
agree). The number of choices can vary and the inclusion of 
a neutral category is optional. 

LISREL. A statistical software package that is used to model and 
test the causal relationships among a system of variables; it 
allows for the simultaneous evaluation of both the measure- 
ment and the causal components in a set of variables. 

logical split-half procedure. The method used to create two halves 
of the MBTI for use in split-half reliability studies. The 
MBTI items were split into halves taking all available item 
statistics into consideration and pairing items that most 
resemble each other. Logical split-halves were used for 
Form M as well as for forms preceding Form M. 

Mantel-Haenszel statistic (M-H A). A statistic used to test the 
hypothesis that there is no differential item functioning 
across subgroups. 


MBTI Step II Expanded Interpretive Report (EIR). A report uti- 
lizing the Step II scoring system to provide a detailed inter- 
pretation of the 20 subscales of the four dichotomies of the 
MBTI. MBTI Form K produces these subscales. tnterpreta- 
tion of this report allows exploration of individuality within 
type by showing a persons distinctive way of experiencing 
and expressing aspects of each type dichotomy. 

middle school. In the United States, grades five through eight. The 
ages of children in middle school range from approximately 
10 through 14. 

midpoint. Ihe division point on the scale for one of the four 
dichotomies that separates respondents into one of the two 
opposite categories; for example, the point that distin- 
guishes Introverts from Extraverts or Sensing types from 
Intuitive types. Accurate identification of the midpoint is 
critical for the MBTI because the opposite categories are 
hypothesized to be qualitatively and not merely quantita- 
tively different. 

N. See Intuition. 

national representative sample (NRS). A sample of 3,009 respon- 
dents from the national sample weighted so as to approxi- 
mate the 1990 U.S. census distribution by gender and eth- 
nic groupings. 

national sample (NS). A sample of 3,009 individuals collected in 
1997 by Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc., publisher of 
the MBTI, using a stratified random selection procedure 
based on random digit dialing of telephone numbers. The 
research form of the MBII was given, and a number of 
other research questions were asked of these subjects. 

NRS. See national representative sample. 

NS. Sce national sample. 

omissions. On the MBT{, questions in which neither of the two 
choices was selected In research using Form M, cases 
are dropped if the number of omissions exceeds four on the 
E-I and J-P dichotomies and five on the S-N and T-F 
dichotomies. 

orientation. Used interchangeably with the term attitude when 
refernng to the MBTI dichotomies of Extraversion-Introver- 
sion and Judging-Perceiving. The E-I referent is to orienta- 
tion of cnceigv; the J-P referent is to orientations to the outa 
world. 

orthogonal. Variables that are uncorrelated; when graphed, the 
variables can be visualized as forming a right angle in space. 

P See Perceiving. 

pec. See preference clarity category, 

pci. 5cc preference clarity index. 

Perceiving. The attitude (orientation) that indicates that either 
Sensing or Intuition is the preferred way of dealing with the 
outer world and is likely to appear in observable behavior. 

perceiving functions. Sensing and Intuition. 

Perceiving type. A person who has a perceiving attitude, that is, 
prefers to use a perceiving function (Sensing or Intuition) 
when dealing with the outside world. 

perception. A term that refers to the process of acquiring 
information. 

phi coefficient. A correlation coefficient used when both variables 
being correlated are in the form of true dichotomies. 

phrase questions. Questions in any of the forms of the MBTI that 
present sentences or phrases for comparison. 

points. On forms of the MBTI that preceded Form M, the eight 
weighted sums of the values for each item on each scale, as 
obtained from the hand-scoring templates. For Form M, 
there are no points for the IRT computer-scored version. 
However, for the Form M self-scorable and template versions, 
the corresponding term is raw points. Neither Form G points 
nor Form M raw points are interpretable, being only a step in 


392  MBTII Manual 





determining either the preference score or the preference 
clarity index. 

polar opposites. Dynamic elements that are opposite to each other 
in both function and attitude. For example, the polar oppo- 
site of dominant extraverted Thinking is inferior intro- 
verted Feeling; the opposite of dominant introverted Sens- 
ing is inferior extraverted Intuition, and so on. 

pole. Either opposite preference category of a bipolar MBTI 
dichotomy, such as the Thinking pole of the T-F dichotomy 
or the Introversion pole of the E-I dichotomy. 

polychoric correlation. A correlation coefficient used when both 
variables being correlated represent, or have been split into, 
two or more categories. 

prediction ratio. The formula used for item analysis of MBTI 
forms preceding Form M, which shows the probability that 
any response is given in accord with total scale score (e.g., 
the probability that a response designed for Extraverts is 
given by Extraverts and not given by Introverts). The pre- 
diction ratio is designed to indicate how well any item dis- 
criminates between choices for its scored preference. 

preference. One of each pair of the four basic mental functions 
and attitudes that in tvpe theory structure an individual's 
personality. Each type dichotomy comprises two prefer- 
ences: Extraversion or Introversion, Sensing or Intuition, 
Thinking or Feeling, and Judging or Perceiving. 

preference clarity. An estimate of the extent to which a respon- 
dent reports favoring one pole of a dichotomy over its 
opposite, based on responses to the MBTI. Such estimates 
include the preference score calculated on forms preceding 
Form M, and the preference clarity category and preference 
clarity index used with Form M. See also preference clarity 
category and preference clarity index. 

preference clarity category (pcc). A term for a range of preference 
clarity indexes that designates the clarity of a reported pref- 
erence for one or the other pole of a dichotomy. The prefer- 
ence clarity categories are as follows: 

slight: pci = 1-5 
moderate: pci 2 6—15 
clear: pci = 16-25 

very clear: pci = 26-30 
For template and self-scored versions of the MBTI, the pec 
is obtained from the raw points associated with each preter- 
ence. For the ranges used, see Table 5.4, page 112. 

preference clarity index (pci). A ratio showing how consistently a 
person answered the questions on the scale of interest com- 
pared to the maximum possihle score achievable on that 
scale. It is analogous to what was formerly referred to as a 
preference score. The pci is the basic result of scoring the 
MBTI. It consists of a letter to denote the direction of prefer- 
ence and a number to indicate the clarity or the consistency 
with which the person indicated that preference. The pci is 
derived by dividing the theta score for a person by the maxi- 
mum theta possible for that preference for that scale (using 
the national sample as a base population), multiplying by 30, 
and rounding up to the nearest integer. Thus, all preference 
clarity indexes are standardized ona scale from I to 30. 

preference domain. A set of characteristics that define one of the 
eight bipolar preferences (E, I, S, N, T, E J, P) of the MBTI 
typology 

preference score. On MBTI forms that preceded Form M, a num- 
ber designed to show how consistently a respondent chose 
one pole of a dichotomy over its opposite. The correspond- 
ing term for Form M is preference clarity index. 

PRELIS. A statisucal software package used to prepare data sets 
for use by another statistical software package, LISREL. 

process. See function. 


H 


psychological opposite. An item option that is not necessarily log- 
ically opposite to the other option, but rather is attractive to 
an individual who holds the preference that the option is 
intended to elicit. Item options serve as stimuli to evoke the 
desired response rather than as grammatically consistent 
pairings. 

r. See reliability coefficient. 

raw points. On the Form M self-scorable and Form M template 
versions of the MBTI, the sum of item responses for each 
preference in a dichotomy. The term points was also used on 
forms that preceded Form M. Neither the raw points of 
Form M nor the points of previous forms is interpretable, 
being only a step in determining either the preference clar- 
ity index or preference score. 

reliability coefficient (r). In classical test theory (CTT), a number 
(a correlation coefficient or a percent agreement) indicating 
the consistency with which a given sample of respondents 
answers the test items. Reliability coefficients are calculated 
for consistency over time (test-retest reliability) as well as 
consistency among the items on a given scale (internal con- 
sistency reliability). 

reported type. The four-letter type that is indicated from a per- 
sons responses to the MBTI assessment tool. Reported type 
is in contrast to true type and best-fit, or verified, type 

rolling norms. A procedure for collecting normative data fora test 
or survey that involves identifying a sample from the 
desired population and then using contacts within that 
sample to lead to the next sample. 

5. See Sensing. 

scale. One of the four dichotomies of the MBTI, that is, the E-I 
scale, S-N scale, etc. Because the term scale tends to con- 
note an amount of a characteristic, as is typical of trait mea- 
sures, it is typically limited to discussion of the psychomet- 
ric characteristics of the MBTI. 

selection ratio. The ratio of the number occurring in a type or 
group of types compared to the number expected to occur. 

selection ratio type table (SRTT). A type table on a group that has 
been compared to another population. The table shows the 
frequency, percent, selection ratio, and a probability based 
on a chi-square analvsis for each tvpe and type grouping. 

sensation. The term used by Jung and many current Jungians that 
corresponds to the term Sensing in MBTI terminology. 

Sensing. The perceiving function that is concerned with experi- 
ences available to the senses. 

Sensing type. A person who prefers Sensing over Intuition as a 
way of perceiving. 

shared facets of type. Typological characteristics that are held in 
common by types that share one or more preferences. 

Spearman Brown formula. Formula used to estimate the reliabil- 
ity of a long form using the known reliabilities of a form 
with fewer items. 

split-half reliability. A method of assessing the internal consis- 
tency of a scale based on splitting the items into two parts 
that are assumed to be equivalent and then correlating the 
scores from the two parts. 

split-half scores (also called X-half and Y-half scores). Scores 
developed from splitting a scale into two halves; used for 
computing split-half reliabilities. Half of the questions are 
assigned to what is called the X scale and half to the Y scale. 

standard error (SE). An estimate of the degree to which a score is 
characterized by unsystematic sources of variance. The 
higher the standard error, the less precise the score and the 
more “noise” there is in the score. Classical test theory 
(CTT) traditionally uses a single standard error for the 
entire scale; item response theory (IRT) provides a measure 
of standard error at each value of theta. 


static level of interpretation. In contrast to the dynamic or devel- 
opmental level of interpretation, a way ol understanding 
type that is limited to definitions and characteristics of the 
four dichotomies considered separately, that is, with no 
attention to dynamic interactions among the preferences or 
developmental issues in the expression of type. 

statistical interaction. A situation in which two or more indepen- 
dent (causative) variables affect a dependent variable (the 
one being acted upon) in ways that are different ftom what 
their separate effects on the dependent variables would be if 
you added them together. 

Step L. A scoring system for MBTI items that yields a persons four- 
letter type; the letters result from the respondents indicated 
preferences on each of the four MBTI dichotomies. 

Step Il. A scoring system for MBTI items that yields subscales that 
are components or facets of the underlying dichotomy 
of each of the four main scales. These subscales resulted 
from a factor analysis of a large group of MBII items. The 
second-order factor analysis of the subscales yields the 
familiar four dichotomies of type. See also MBTI Step H 
Expanded Interpretive Report (EIR) and Forin K. 

Step H Expanded Interpretive Report, Scc MBTI Step I] Expanded 
Interpretive Report (EIR). 

Step III. Sec Step HI Type Differentiation Indicator (TDI). 

Step III Type Differentiation Indicator (TDI). A method of scor- 
ing Form J of the MBTI that yields seven additional sub- 
scales to those of Step II. These are known as Comfort Scales. 

straws in the wind. The metaphor used by Isabel Myers to 
describe her approach to writing items for the MBII. She 
reasoned that because peoples preferences are often not con- 
sciously formulated, they probably could not report about 
them directly. The simple questions of the Indicator were 
therefore designed as observable “pointers,” or “straws in 
the wind," that allow us to make inferences about the direc- 
tion of the wind (i.e., the underlying preference) itself. 

T. Sec Thinking. 

TCC. Scc test characteristics curve. 

TDI (Type Differentiation Indicator). Scc Step III Type Differen- 
tiation Indicator. 

temperament. One of four categories hypothesized to be basic 
ways of identifying individual differences in personality. As 
conceptualized by modern temperament theorists, these 
categories are Guardian, Artisan, Idealist, and Rationalist. 

tertiary function. The function opposite to the auxiliary function 
in the dynamics of any type. For example, if the auxihary 
function is Thinking, the tertiary function is Feeling. In 
theory, the tertiary function is less accessible to conscious 
direction than the auxiliary function, but more accessible 
than the unconscious inferior function. 

test characteristics curve. The composite of the information 
described by item characteristics curves. 

test information function (TIF). In item response theory, the sum 
of the information found in the individual items that make 
up a scale, i.e., the sum of item information functions. 
Specifically, it is an indication of the amount of precision 
produced by a test at each possible value of theta (0). The 
TIF is the equivalent of the reliability coefficient of classical 
test theory (CTT). 

test standard error (TSE). The item response theory equivalent of 
the standard error of mcasurcment in CTT (classical test the- 
ory). TSE shows the expected standard error that would be 
found when estimating 0 scores from the observed item 
responses across the full range of possible 0 scores. 

tetrachoric correlation. A correlation coefficient used when both 
variables being correlated are in the form of artificial 
dichotomies. 





Glossary 393 


theia (8). In IRT terminology, test scores on a psychological char- 
acteristic that are roughly equivalent to the “true scores” of 
classical test theory. Theta scores correspond directly to 
MBTI continuous scores that were calculated using the pre- 
diction ratio method developed by Isabel Myers. Theta 
scores can be dichotomized by identifying a cut-off point or 
midpoint that separates individuals into two groups, associ- 
ated with the poles of a dichotomy. 

Thinking (T). Of the two opposite judging functions, the one by 
which decisions are made by ordering choices in terms 
of logical cause-effect and objective analysis of relevant 
information. 

Thinking type. A person who prefers using Thinking over Feeling 
as a way of making judgments. 

three-parameter model. In item response theory, the use of three 
parameters to model the relationship between item re- 
sponses and the latent characteristic that the items are 
designed to measure. The three parameters are 
a paxameter: the amount of information available from the 

item; the slope of the item characteristic curve at any 
given value of theta; higher a parameters provide 
more information or discrimination among people 
with different levels of theta 

b parameter: a measure of item difficulty based on the area 
on the theta scale at which a test item produces the 
maximum amount of information regarding the per- 
sons score on the psychological characteristic in 
question. Because the right end of the scale is arbi- 
trarily defined as the keyed direction in IRT (the I, N, 
E. or P poles in the MBTI), items with very high b 
parameters discriminate between people with very 
clear preferences as compared to those with clear 
preferences. The most desirable MBTI items are 
those that provide maximum information at the mid- 
point of each dichotomy rather than at the "ex- 
tremes,” i.e., those that accurately identify Introverts 
versus Extraverts, Sensing types versus [ntuitives, 
and so on. 

c parameter: defines the baseline for item endorsement rates 
that would be expected from individuals who score 
very far to the low (left) end of the theta scale. In 
MBTI terms, for example, the probability that some- 
one who is "very clear” about their preference for 
Extraversion would endorse the opposite, Intro- 
verted response to an El item. In aptitude or achieve- 
ment tests, this is the "guessing" parameter. In a per- 
sonality instrument like the MBTI, this parameter 
accounts for the social desirability of the responses. 

tie-breaking formula. A statistical method of labeling the type 
preference of respondents who obtain an equal number of 
points on both poles of a dichotomy. Though tied scores are 
rare for Form M, the tradition established for previous 
lorms is followed when it does occur, that is, ties are broken 

in favor of I, N, E or P. 

trait. In the field of personality, a single personality characteristic 
that is present in all people in varying degrees. When per- 
sonality is described in terms of traits, we assume that 
everyone has the same characteristics. The differences 
between people are due to how much they have of each of 
the traits that describe human personality, 

trait theory. A system for explaining personality variation that 
postulates traits as the underlying units of descriptions. Trait 
theory approaches predominate among psychologists. Dif- 
ferent trait theories vary primarily in the number and nature 
of the traits that are believed to be sufficient and necessary to 
explain human personality. In contrast to type theory and 


304 MBTI Manual 





the MBTI, which rest on a specific theoretical system, most 
trait systems derive their sets of traits empirically and do 
not postulate any theoretical basis for the particular array ol 
traits used. 

transdichotomous facets of type. Typological characteristics that 
are “more than the sum of the parts.” That is, they are not 
described by or included in any of the four dichotomous 
preferences that identify a type. These are the characteris- 
tics that make MBTI types dilferent from trait descriptions 
of personality, even when the traits being described have 
names similar to those used with the MBTI. 

true type. The personality type that is the hypothetical “true” one 
for the individual, in contrast to reported type and best-fit, 
or verihed, type. 

type. In the field of personality, and specifically for the MBTI, a 
unique combination of mental attitudes (E o I and J or P) 
and mental functions (5 or N and T or F) that is more than 
the sum of its parts. Specifically, 1 of the [6 combinations of 
four preferences, each with specific characteristics postu- 
lated from the dynamics of the theory. Type is not used to 
denote a single preference. 

type code. The four letters used to denote a type, lor example, 
EST] or INF]. 

type development. In type theory, the emergence and expression 
of the dynamic elements that make up psychological type; 
the ages or developmental stages when the dominant, auxil- 
iary, tertiary, and inferior functions may be manifested, and 
the roles these play in personality growth. 

Type Differentiation Indicator. Sec Step IH Type Differentiation 
[ndicator. 








type dynamics. The interaction of the dominant, auxiliary, 
tertiary, and inferior functions along with the attitudes of 
Extraversion and Introversion in which they are typically 
used. The dynamics of any one of the 16 types is inherent in 
the four-letter type code used to specify a type, such as IST] 
OPESFE 

type dynamics interactions. The theoretically predicted interac- 
tions hetween the E-I and J-P dichotomies that serve to 
identify the forms (dominant or auxiliary) and attitudes 
(Introverted or Extraverted) of the functions. 

type table. A display of the 16 types in the format developed by 
Isabel Myers. The type table may have only the 16 types or 
may be supplemented with a column at the side showing 
the type groupings. 

typology. A systematic way of describing types based on character- 
istics that are shared in various ways by the types. In the 
ficld of personality, a system of classifying personalities into 
qualitatively distinct groups (types) whose members share 
some characteristics with other groups, while at the same 
time possessing additional characteristics that are not 
shared with any other group. 

unique facets of type. Typological characteristics that are “more 
than the sum of the parts” and are only associated with a sin- 
gle type. These are the typological characteristics that make 
each of the 16 MBTI types different from every other type. 

whole type. The basic unit of type theory, being the four dynamic 
elements that interact uniquely to form one of the 16 types. 

word-pair items. Items used in the MBTI in which two words are 
presented to the respondent, who must choose the word 
that is most appealing. 


Adler, N. J. (1991). International dimensions of organizational 
behavior Kent International Dimensions of Business Series. 
Boston: PWS-Kent. 

American Psychological Association. (1990). Guidelines for 
providers of psychological services to cthnic, linguistic and cul- 
turally diverse populations. Washington, D.C.: Author, 
Board of Ethnic Minority Affairs, Task Force on delivery of 
Service to Ethnic Minority Populations. 

Amis-Reichle, B. (1995). Female elementary school teachers 
Myers-Briggs function preferences, child developmental 
belief orientations and preferences for behavior management 
approaches (Doctoral dissertation, University of San Fran- 
cisco). Dissertation Abstracts International, 55/08-B, 3624. 

Anchors, S., &amp; Dana, R. (1989). Type and substance abuse in col- 
lege age students. Journal of Psychological Type, 17, 26-30. 

Anchors, S., &amp; Hay, S. (1990). Resident assistants: Are they similar 
or dissimilar to students from whom they are selected? Jour- 
nal of College and University Student Housing, 20, 2, 18-21. 

Anchors, S., Robbins, M. A., &amp; Gershman, E. S. (1989). The rela- 
tionship between Jungian type and persistence to gradua- 
tion among college students. Journal of Psychological Type, 
17, 20-25. 

Anchors, S., &amp; Robinson, D. C. (1992). Psychological type and 
the accomplishment of student development tasks. NASPA 
Journal, 29, 2, 131-135. 

Anderson, S. J. (1992). Psychological type and leadership (Doc- 
toral dissertation, Universitv of Calgary, Canada, 1992). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 54, 378A. 

Aposial, R., &amp; Trontvent, R. (1989). College students’ academic 
comfort and personality. Journal of College Student Develop- 
ment, 30, 210-212. 

Arain, A. A. (1968). Relationships among counseling clients’ per- 
sonalities, expectations, and problems (Doctoral disserta- 
tion, Rutgers University). Dissertation Abstracts Interna- 
tional, 29, 4903A4-4904A. (University Microhlms No. 
68-8640) 

Arthur, M. B., &amp; Rousseau, D. M. (1996). A career lexicon for the 
21st century. Academy of Management Executive, 10, (4) 
28-39. 

Auman, K. S. (1993). Goal accomplishment style and psychologi- 
cal type: Cultural variations. Psychological Type and Culture- 
East and West: A Multicultural Research Symposium, 207—220. 

Bail, E T. (1993). An exploration of relationships among psycho- 
logical type, ethnicity and computer-mediated communica- 
tion. Psychological Type and Culture-East and West: A Multi- 
cultural Research Symposium, 221—227. 


References 


Bailey, R. S. (1991). The Leadership Style Indicator. Greensboro, 
NC: Center for Creative Leadership. 

Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1993, Fall). The interaction of cul- 
tural values and type development: INTP women across 
cultures. Bulletin of Psychological Type, 16, (4), 17-18. 

Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1995a). The challenge of change in 
organizations: Helping employees thrive in the new frontier. 
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1995b). INTP women across cultures. 
In R. Moody (Ed.), Proceedings of psychological type and cul- 
ture-cast and west: A multicultural research symposium (pp. 
99-119). Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psy- 
chological Type. 

Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1997a). MBTI type and change. Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1997b). MBTI type and change partici- 
pants guide. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1997c). Enhancing leadership during 
organizational change. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby 
(Eds.), Developing leaders: Rescarch and applications in psy- 
chological type and leadership development. Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 

Barr, L., &amp; Barr, N. (1994). Leadership development: Maturity and 
power Austin, TX: Eakin Press. 

Barrett, L. (1989). Impact of teacher personality on classroom 
environment. Journal of Psychological Type, 18, 50-56. 
Barrineau, P. (1997). The type to drink: Undergraduate alcohol 
policy violators and personality type. Journal of Psvchologi- 

cal Type, 41, 23-27. 

Barth, R. L. (1980). Run, school, run. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Bathurst, J. (1995). Atlas of type in New Zealand. Wellington, NZ: 
idic. 

Battle, P. C. (1989). The effect of race and culture on Black MBTI 
preferences. In Proceedings of APT VII International Confer- 
ence (pp. 161-63). Gainesville, FL: Association for Psycho- 
logical Type. 

Battle, P. C. (1994). Two warring ideals in one dark body. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Third. International Conference on. Myers- 
Briggs Iypology (pp. 147-152). Montreal: Internauonal 
Type Users Organization. 

Bayne, R. (1988). Accuracy in judging the four attitudes. Journal of 
Psychological Type, 16, 61-66. 

Beck, E S. (1973). Affective sensitivity of counselor supervisors as 
a dimension of growth in their trainee groups (Doctoral dis- 
sertation, University of Southern California). Dissertation 


395 


306 MBTI Manual 


Abstracts International, 33, 32774. (University Microfilms 
No. 73-720) 

Berens, L. V. (1998). Understanding yourself and others: An introduction 
to tempcrament. Huntington Beach, CA: Telos Publications. 

Betz, N. E., Borgen, E H., &amp; Harmon, L. W. (1996). Skills Confidence 
Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Betz, N. E., Borgen, F H., &amp; Harmon, L. W. (1996). Skills Confi- 
dence Inventory Applications and Technical Guide. Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Beyler, J., &amp; Schmeck, R. R. (1992). Assessment of individual dif- 
ferences in preferences for holistic-analytic strategies: Eval- 
uation of some commonly available instruments. Educa- 
tional and Psychological Measurement, 52, 3, 709-719. 

Blaylock, B. K. (1983). Teamwork in a sinulated production envi- 
ronment. Research in Psychological Type, 6, 58-67. 

Block, J. (1978). The Q-Sort Method. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Borham, B., &amp; Watts, J. (1994). Personality types and learning 
styles in undergraduate students of education and physics. 
In Proceedings of the Second Bicnnial National Conference of 
the Australian Association for Psychological Type (pp. 9-21). 
Melbourne: Australian Association for Psychological Type. 

Bowen, J. L. (1990). The combined predictive effect of creativity 
level and personality type on college students’ reflective 
judgment (Doctoral dissertation, East Texas State Univer- 
sity). Dissertation Abstracts International, 51/01-A, 110. 

Boyd, N. E. (1995). An examination of interpersonal relationships 
between student and cooperating teachers (Doctoral disser- 
tation, University of Memphis). Dissertation Abstracts Inter- 
national, 55/10-A, 3076. 

Braun, J. A. (1971). The empathic ability of psychotherapists as 
related to therapist perceptual flexibility and professional 
experience, patient insight, and therapist-patient similarity 
(Doctoral dissertation, Fordham University). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 32, 2391B. (University Microfilms 
No. 71-26, 956) 

Brehm, S., &amp; Kassin, S. (1993). Social psychology. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Bridges, W (1980). Transitions: Making sense of lifcs changes. 
Rcading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 

Bridges, W. (1992a). The character of organizations: Using Jungian 
type in organizational development. Palo Alto, CA: Davies- 
Black. 

Bridges, W (1992b). Managing transitions. Reading, MA: Addison- 
Wesley. 

Bridges, W. (1994). JobShift. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 

Brislin, R. (1990). Applied cross-cultural psychology. Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage. 

Brislin, R. (1993), Understanding cultures influence on behavior. 
Chicago, IL: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College &amp; School 
Division. 

Brislin, R., Cushner, K., Cherrie, C., &amp; Yong, M. (1986). Intercul- 
tural interactions: A practical guide. Volume 9, Cross-Cultural 
Research and Methodology Series. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications. 

Brocato, E C. (1985). Psychological type and task accomplishment in 
the public school management team. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK. 

Brock, S. A. (1994). Using type in selling. Palo Alto, CA: Consult- 
ing Psychologists Press. 

Brock, S. A. (1995). Four part framework (rcv. ed.). Minneapolis, 
MN: Brock Associates. 

Brock, S. A. (1996, Fall). A perspective on type in organizations. 
Bulletin of Psychological Type, 19(4) 5-6. 

Brock, S. A., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (n.d.). Valuing preferences in the 
workplace. [Handout]. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applica- 
tions of Psychological Type. 


Brooks, E R., &amp; Johnson, R. W. (1979). Self-descriptive adjectives 
associated with a Jungian personality inventory. Psychologi- 
cal Reports, 44 (3, Pt. 1), 747-750. 

Brown, D. (1996). Browns values-based, holistic model of career 
and life-role choices and satisfaction. In D. Brown &amp; L. 
Brooks (Eds.), Carcer choice and development (3rd ed.). San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Brown, V. L., &amp; DeCoster, D. A. (1991). The Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator as a developmental measure: Implications for stu- 
dent learners in higher education. Journal of Collcge Student 
Development, 32, 378-379. 

Brush, L. C. (1989). Training residential advisors in peer counsel- 
ing: Implications of type (MBTI/PTPI). Journal of Psycholog- 
ical Type, 17, 73-78. 

Burt, R. B. (1968). An exploratory study of personality manifesta- 
lions in paintings (Doctoral dissertation, Duke University). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 29, 1493B. (University 
Microfilms No. 68-14, 298) 

Call, M. E., &amp; Sotillo, S. (1993). Personality, culture, and field sen- 
sitivity. In R. Moody (Ed.), Proceedings of Psychological Type 
and Culture—East and West: A Multicultural Research Sym- 
posium (pp. 193-198). Gainesville, FL: Center for Applica- 
tions of Psychological Type. 

Campbell, D. P, &amp; Hansen, J. C. (1981). Manual for the SVIB-SCH 
Strong-Campbell Interest Inventory (rd ed.). Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press. 

Canning, E.A.B. (1983). An analysis of cognitive style, hemi- 
spheric preference, personality type and academic achieve- 
ment in a group of economically disadvantaged secondary 
students (Doctoral dissertation, University of Pittsburgh). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 45/02-A, 457. 

Carey, J. C., Hamilton, D. L., &amp; Shanklin, G. (1985). Psychological 
type and interpersonal compatibility: Evidence for a rela- 
tionship between communication style preference and rela- 
tionship satisfaction in college roommates. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 10, 36-39. 

Carey, J. C., Hamilton, D. L., &amp; Shanklin, G. (1986). Does person- 
ality similarity affect male roommates’ satisfaction? Journal 
of College Student Personnel, 27, 1, 65-69. 

Carlson, J. (1985). Recent assessments of the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator. Journal of Personality Asscssment, 49, 356—365. 

Carlson, R. (1980). Studies of Jungian typology: II. Representa- 
tions of the personal world. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 38, 801—810. 

Carlson, R., &amp; Levy, N. (1973). Studies in Jungian typology: 1. 
Memory, social perception and social action. Journal of Per- 
sonality, 41 (4), 559—576. 

Carlyn, M. (1975). A comparison of two methods of assessing a subjects 
dominant process. Paper presented at the First National Con- 
ference on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, Gainesville, FL. 

Carrell, P L., &amp; Monroe, L. B. (1993). Learning styles and compo- 
sition. Modern Language Journal, 77, 2, 148-162. 

Carskadon, T. G. (1979). Behavioral differences between 
extraverts and Introverts as measured by the Mvers-Briggs 
Type Indicator: An experimental demonstration. Research in 
Psychological Type, 2, 78-82. 

Carskadon, T. G. (1979). Clinical and counseling aspects of the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator: A research review. Research in 
Psychological Type, 2, 2-31. 

Carskadon, T. G. (1982). Myers-Briggs Type Indicator characteriza- 
tions: A Jungian horoscope? Research in Psychological Type, 
8, 87-88. 

Carskadon, T. G., &amp; Cook, D. D. (1982). Validity of MBTI type 
descriptions as perceived by recipients unfamiliar with 
type. Research in Psychological Type, 8, 89-94. 

Carter, J. A. (1990). A comparison of personality types as deter- 
mined by the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator with the process 


of separate-knowing and connected-knowing procedural 
processing among female uadergraduate and nontraditional 
students (Doctoral dissertation. Michigan State University). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 51/05-A. 1475. 

Carver, C. S. (1989). How should multifaceted personality con- 
structs be tested? Issues illustrated by self-monitoring, attri- 
butional style, and hardiness. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 56, 577-585. 

Casas, E. (1990). The development of the French version of the 
MBTI in Canada and in France. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 20, 3-15. 

Casas, E. (1995). Diversity patterns of type distributions among cul- 
tures: What do the differences mean? In R. Moody (Ed.), Pro- 
ceedings of Psychological Type and Culture-East and West: A 
Multicultural Research Symposium (pp. 65-76). Gainesville, 
FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

Casas, E., &amp; Hamlet, J. (1984). Les types psychologiques des 
clients, des etudients-conseillers et des superviseurs dans 
un centre d'entrainement clinique: Etude sur la compatibil- 
ity client-conseiller et l'apprentissage de la therapie [Psy- 
chological types of clients, student-counselors and supervi- 
sors in a clinical training center: Study of client-counselor 
compatibility and therapy internship]. Interim Report, 
CRSHC, Subvention No. 410 834 0428, University of 
Ottawa, Canada. 

Casey, L. (1986). Personality characteristics associated with acade- 
mic achievement of Hispanic high school students (Doc- 
toral dissertation, University of California, Berkelev). Dis- 
sertation Abstracts International, 48/05-B, 1541. 

Catoe, C. W. (1992). Developmental profiles of college students: A 
comparison of moral development stage and Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator personality types (Doctoral dissertation, 
North Carolina State University). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 53/03-B, 1639. 

Center for Applications of Psychological Type (1995). Profile of 
your MBTI results. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications 
of Psychological Type. 

Chartrand, J. M. (1991). The evolution of trait-and-factor career 
counseling: A person x environment fit approach. Journal of 
Counseling and Development, 69, 518-524. 

Chartrand, J. M., Robbins, S. B., &amp; Morrill, W. H. (1997). Career Fac- 
tors Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Chesborough, S. R. (1994). The use of the MBII to improve 
opportunities for the academic success of scholarship ath- 
letes. In Proceedings: Orchestrating Educational Change in the 
908—The Role of Psychological Type, 119-137. 

Chiang, G. C. (1991). Student ratings of teachers, teacher psycho- 
logical type and teacher classroom behavior: An 
exploratory study in gifted education (Doctoral disserta- 
tion, Northwestern Uuiversity). Disscrtation Abstracts Intcr- 
national, 52/06-A, 2001. 

Clancy, S. G. (1997). STJs and change: Resistance, reaction, or 
misunderstanding? In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), 
Developing lcadcrs: Rescarch and applications in psychological 
type and leadership development (pp. 415—438). Palo Alto, 
CA: Davies-Black. 

Coan, R. W. (1979). Psychologists: Personal and theorctical path- 
ways. New York: Irvington. 

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the bchavioral sci- 
cnces (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ. Erlbaum. 

Comrey, A. L. (1983). An evaluation of the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator Academic Psychology Bulletin, 5, 115-129. 

Cooper, S. E., &amp; Miller, J. A. (1991). MBTI learning style-teaching 
style discongruencies. Educational and Psychological Mca- 
surement, 51, 699-706. 

Corlett, E. S., &amp; Millner, N. B. (1993). Navigating midlife: Using 
typology as a guidc. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 


References 397 


Cornett, C. E. (1983). What you should know about teaching and 
learning styles. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa Educa- 
tional Foundation. 

Costa, P Y., &amp; McCrae, R. R. (1985). The NEO personality inventory 
manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 

Craig, D. L., Craig, C. H., &amp; Sleight, C. C. (1988). Type preferences 
of decision-makers: Corporate and clinical. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 16, 33-37. 

Cropley, A. J. (1965). Originality, personality and intelligence. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta. 

Dana, R. (1993). Multicultural assessment perspective for professional 
psychology. Boston: Allyn &amp; Bacon. 

Daugherty, P W, Randall, K. P, &amp; Globetti, E. (1997). Psychologi- 
cal types among women senior student affairs officers on 
college and university campuses. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 41, 28-32. 

Dawis, R.V. (1996). The theory of work adjustment and person- 
environment-correspondence counseling. In D. Brown and 
L. Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development (3rd ed.). 
San Francisco, CA: Jossev-Bass. 

Dawson, B. G., &amp; Guy, R. E (1994). Personality type and grade 
performance in a TV-assisted course. Journal of Psychoiogi- 
cal Typc, 29, 38-42. 

De Beer, J. (1997). Dealing with personal and cultural transitions. 
Paper presented at APT XII, Association for Psychological 
Type International Conference, Boston, MA. 

Delbridge-Parker, L., &amp; Robinson, D. C. (1989). Type and acade- 
mically gifted adolescents. Journal of Psychological Type, 17, 
66-72. 

Demarest, L. (1997). Dear Deborah and John: What the gende: 
experts can learn from type. In Proceedings: APT XII Biennial 
International Conference, Boston, MÀ. 

Denison, D. R., &amp; Mishra, A. K. (1995). Toward a theory of orga- 
nizational culture and effectiveness. Organizational Science, 
6 (2) 204-223. 

DeVellis, R. E (1991). Scale development: Theory and applica- 
tions. Applied Social Research Methods Series, 26. Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage. 

DiMarco, R. (1997). Using the MBTI in career pathing. In Proceed- 
ings of APT XII, 3—6. 

DiTiberio, J. K. (1977). The suength of Sensing (Intuition preler- 
ence on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator as related to 
empathic discrimination ol overt or covert feeling messages 
of others (Doctoral dissertation, Michigan State Univer- 
sity). Dissertation Abstracts International, 37, 5599A. (Uni- 
versitv Microfilms No. 77-5789) 

DiTiberio, J. K. (1996). Education, learning styles, and cognitive 
styles. In A. L. Hammer (Ed.), MBTI applications: A decade 
of rescarch on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 
123-166). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

DiTiberio, J. K., &amp; Hammer, A L. (1993). Introduction to type in 
college. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

DiTiberio, J. K., Harrison, H. A., Sim, H., &amp; Kim, J. (1995). Cul- 
ture, gender, and work role expectations as factors in type 
distribution. In Proceedings of APT Xl International Confer- 
ence (pp. 123-126). Kansas City, MO: Association for Psy- 
chological Type. 

Diviberio, J. K., &amp; Jensen, G. H. (1995). Writing and personality: 
Finding vour voice, your style, your way. Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 

Donovan, A. J. (1994). The interaction of personality traits in 
applied music teaching (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Southern Mississippi). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
55/06-A, 1499. 

Drasgow, E (1987). A study of measurement bias of two standardized 
psychological tests. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 19-29. 


398 MBTI Manual 


Drasgow, E, &amp; Hulin, C. L. (1990). Item response theory. In M. D. 
Dunnette &amp; L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 377-636). Palo Alto, 
CA: Davies-Black. 

Drummond, R. J., &amp; Stoddard, A. H. (1992). Learning style and 
personality type. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 75, 992104. 

Dunning, D. G., Lange, B. M., &amp; Adams, A B. (1990). Personality 
type and interpersonal communication behavior of senior 
dental students. Journal of Psychological Type, 19, 59-64. 

Edmunds, M. (1982). Jungian personality type and imagery ability 
within a holistic health context (Doctoral dissertation, 
Pennsylvania State University). Dissertation Abstracts Inter- 
national, 43 (3), 868B. 

Edwards, A E. (1954). Manual for the EPPS. New York: The Psy- 
chological Corporation. 

Eygins, J. A. (1979). The interaction between structure in learning 
matcrials and the personality type of learners (Doctoral dis- 
sertation, Indiana University). Dissertation Abstracts Inter- 
national, +0/07-A, 3886. 

Ehrman, M. (1990). Owls and doves: Cognition, personality and 
learning success. In J. E. Alatis (Ed.) Linguistics, language 
teaching and language acquisition: The interdependence of thc- 
ory, practice and research (pp. 413-437). Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. 

Ehrman, M. (1993). Ego boundaries revisited: Toward a model of 
personality and learning. In J. E. Alatis (Ed.), Strategic interac- 
tion and language acquisition: Theory, practice and research, (pp. 
331-362). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 

Ehrman, M. (1994a). The Type Differentiation Indicator and adult 
foreign language learning success. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 30, 10-29. 

Ehrman, M. (1994b). Weakest and strongest learners in intensive 
language training: A study of extremes. In C. Klee (Ed.), 
Faces in a crowd: Individual learners in multiscction pro- 
grams. Boston: Heinle and Heinle. 

Ehrman, M. (1995). The Modern Language Aptitude Test: What does 
it tell us? Unpublished manuscript. 

Ehrman, M., &amp; Oxford, R. (1989). Eflects of sex differences, 
career choice, and psychological type on adult language 
learning strategies. Modern Language Journal, 73, 1, 1-13. 

Ehrman, M.. &amp; Oxford, R. (1990). Adult language learning styles 
and strategies in an intensive training setting. Modern Lan- 
guage Journal, 74, 3, 311-327. 

Ehrman, M. &amp; Oxford, R. (1995). Cognition plus: Correlates of 
language learning success. Modern Language Journal, 79, 1, 
67-89. 

Elliott, G. R., &amp; Sapp, G. E. (1988). The relationship between the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and the Grasha-Riechmann Stu- 
dent Learning Styles Questionnaire. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 14, 46-50. 

Elliot, G. V (1975). A descriptive study of characteristics and per- 
sonality types of counselors of runaway youth (Doctoral 
dissertation, University of Maryland). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 36, 31 19B-31220B. (University Microfilms 
No. 75-28, 741). 

Embretson, S. E. (1996). The new rules of measurement. Psycho- 


Erickson, C., Gantz, B. S., &amp; Stephenson, R. W. (1970). Logical and 
construct validation of a short-form hiographical inventory 
predictor of scientific creativity. In Proceedings of the 78th 
Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association, 5 
(1), 151-152. 

Erskine, C. G., Westerman, G. H., &amp; Grandy, T. G. (1986). Per- 
sonality styles of first-year dental students. Journal of Dental 
Education, 50, 4, 221-224. 

Evans, L. N. (1976). A psycho-temporal theory of personality: A 
study of the relationship between temporal orientation, affect, 


and personality type (Doctoral dissertation, United States 
International University). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
37, 1875B. (University Microfilms No. 76-22, 381) 

Fairhurst, A. M., &amp; Fairhurst, L, Ł. (1995). Effective teaching, effec- 
tive learning: Making the personality connection in your class- 
room. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Faucett, J. M., Morgan, E. R., Poling, T. H, &amp; Johnson, J. (1995). 
MBTI type and Kohlbergs postconventional stages of moral 
reasoning. Journal of Psychological Type, 34, 17-23. 

Ferdinan, R. Ł., &amp; DiTiberio, J. K. (1996). Psychological type and 
the writing process of fifth graders. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 38, 24-33. 

Fisher, N. M. (1994). MBTI type and writing-across-the-curricu- 
lum. Journal of Psychological Type, 28, 43-47. 

Fitzgerald, C. (1997a). the MBTI and leadership development: 
Personality and leadership reconsidered in changing times. 
In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds), Developing leaders: 
Rescarch and applications in psychological type and leadership 
development (pp. 33-59), Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Fitzgerald, C. (1997b). Tvpe development and leadership develop- 
ment: Integrating reality and vision, mind and heart. In C. 
Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), Developing leaders: Research 
and applications in psychological type and leadership develop- 
ment (pp. 311—336). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Fitzgerald, C., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1997a). Applying type dynamics to 
leadership development. tn C. Fitzgerald &amp; t. K. Kirby 
(Eds.). Developing leaders: Research and applications in psy- 
chological type and leadership development (pp. 269-310). 
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Fitzgerald, C., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (Eds.). (1997b). Developing leaders: 
Rescarch and applications in psychological type and leadership 
development. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Fleenor, J. W. (1997). The relationship between the MBTI and mea- 
sures of personality and performance in management groups. 
In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), Developing leaders: 
Research and applications in psychological type and leadership 
development (pp. 115-138). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Fourqurean, J., Meisgeier, C., &amp; Swank, P (1988). The Murphy- 
Meisgeier Type Indicator for Children: Exploring the link 
between psychological type preferences of children and acad- 
emic achievement. Journal of Psychological Type, 16, 42-46. 

Fourqurean, J., Meisgeier, C., &amp; Swank, P. (1990). The link 
between learning style and Jungian psychological type: A 
finding of two bipolar preference dimensions. Journal of 
Experimental Education, 58, 3, 225-237. 

Friedman, C. P, &amp; Slatt, L. M. (1988). New results relating the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and medical specialty choice. 
Journal of Medical Education, 63, 325-327. 

Frederick, A. H. (1975). Self-actualization and personality type: A 
comparative study of doctoral majors in educational admin- 
istration and the helping relations (Doctoral dissertation, 
University of Alabama). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
35, 7055A-7050A. (University Microfilms No. 75-9896) 

Freeman, S. C. (1994). An investigation of psychological type 
and career maturity (Myers-Briggs Type Indicator). Unpub- 
lished doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina, 
Greensboro. . 

Fry, E. (1977). Fry's readability graph: Clarifications, validity, and 
extension to level 17. Journal of Reading, 21, 249. 

Fu, J. M. (1992). The relationship between the MBTI personality 
types of international students and adjustment to American 
society (Doctoral dissertation, University of San Francisco). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 53/01-A, 69. 

Futrell, D. A. (1992), Cognitive ability and Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator preferences as predictors of group performance: An 
empirical study. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univer- 
sity of Tennessee. 


Gallagher, S. A. (1988). An analysis of visual-spatial ability, intel- 
lectual efficiency, and learning style on mathematics 
achievement of gifted male and gifted female adolescents 
(Doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill). Dissertation Abstracts International, 48/07-A, 1733. 

Galvin, M. D. (1976). Facilitative conditions and psychological 
type in intake interviews by professionals and paraprofes- 
sionals (Doctoral dissertation, University of Florida). Dis- 
sertation Abstracts International, 36, 6378B. (University 
Microfilms No. 76-12, 078). 

Garden, A. M. (1989). Organizational size as a variable in type 
analysis and employee turnover. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 17. 3-13. 

Garden, A. M. (1997). Relationships between MBTI profiles, moti- 
vation profiles and career paths. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 41. 3-16. 

Gautsch, S. M. (1993). The effects of perceptual style with mode 
of instruction in a hypermedia language learning environ- 
ment. Psychological Type and Culture—East and West: A 
Multicultural Rescarch Symposium, 229-240. 

Gehringer, G. S. (1994). A comparison of African American 
MBTl/carcer matches with the normative MBTHI/carecr data in 
the “Atlas of Type Tables.” Unpublished doctoral disserta- 
tion, Walden University. 

Gerhardt, R. (1983). Liberal religion and personality type. 
Research in Psychological Type, 6, 47-53. 

Gilchrist, B. J. (1991). The Mvers-Briggs Type Indicator as a tool for 
clinieal legal edueation. Saint Louis University Public Law 
Review, 10, 601-613. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Ginn, C. W. (1995). Families: Using type to enhance mutual under- 
standing. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psy- 
chological Type. 

Golanty-Koel, R. (1978). The relationship of psychological type 
and mass media preferences to the values of non-academic 
high school students (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
California, Berkeley). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
38/08-A, 4683. 

Gordon, V. N., Coscarelli, W. C., &amp; Sears, S. J. (1986). Compara- 
tive assessments of individual differences in learning and 
career decision making. Journal of College Student Personnel, 
27, 3, 233-242. 

Gordy, C. C., &amp; Thorne, B. M. (1994). Proofreading ability as a 
function of personality type. Journal of Psychological Type, 
28, 29-36. 

Gottlredson, G. D., &amp; Holland, J. L. (1996). Dictionary of Holland 
Occupational Codes (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources. 

Gough, H. G. (1965). Conceptual analysis of psychological test 
scores and other diagnostic variables. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 70, 294-302. 

Gough, H. G. (1976). Studying creativity by means of word associ- 
ation tests. Journal of Applied Psychology, 61, 348—353. 
Gough, H. G. (1981). Studies of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator in a 
personality assessment research institute. Paper presented at 
the Fourth National Conference on the Myers-Briggs Type 

Indicator, Palo Alto, CA. 

Gough, H. G., &amp; Bradley, P. (1996). CPI manual (3rd ed.). Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Gough, H. G., &amp; Heilbrun, A. B., Dr. (1983). The Adjective Check 
List manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Graff, R. W., Larrimore, M., Whitehead, G. 1., &amp; Hopson, N. W. 
(1991). Carcer counseling practices: A survey of college/uni- 
versity counseling centers. Poster presented at the annual 
mecting of the American Psychological Association, San 
Francisco, CA. 


References 399 


Grandy, T. G., Westerman, G. H., Ocando, R. A., &amp; Erskine, C. G. 
(1996). Predicting dentists’ career choices using the Myers- 
Briggs Ivpe Indicator. Journal of the American Dental Associa- 
tion, 127, 253-258. 

Grant, W. H. (1965). Comparability of the Gray-Wheelwright Psy- 
chological Type Questionnaire and the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator. Auburn, AL: Research Report, Student Counseling 
Service, Auburn University. 

Grant, W. H. (1966). Self-description by MBTI types on the Adjective 
Check List. Auburn, AL: Office of Student Development, 
Auburn University. 

Grant, W. H., Thompson, M., &amp; Clark, T. (1983). From image to 
likeness: A Jungian path in the gospel journey. Ramsey, NJ. 
Paulist Press. 

Gratias, M., &amp; Harvey, R. J. (1998, April). Gender and cthnicity- 
based differential item functioning in the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator, Paper presented at the Annual Conference of 
the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 
Ballasel x. 

Greenberg, S. E., &amp; Harvey, R. J. (1993). Differential item function- 
ing on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Paper presented at 
the annual conference of the Society for Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, San Francisco, CA. 

Griffin, T. D., &amp; Salter, D. W. (1993). Psychological type and 
involvement in a university residence hall judicial system. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 27, 32-38. 

Grindler, M. C., &amp; Stratton, B. D. (1990). Type Indicator and its 
relationship to teaching and learning styles. Action in 
Teacher Education, 12, 1, 31—34. 

Grutter, J. (1990). The MBTI and Supers styles of carcer “mainte- 
nance." Career Planning and Adult Development Journal, 6, 
13-17. 

Grutter, J. (1993). Counseling the less preferred MBTI functions foi 
carcer transition and disengagement. Paper presented at the 
Association lor Psychological Type Conference, Newport 
Beach, CA. 

Grutter, J. (19982). Making it in todays organizations: Carce! 
advancement using the Strong and the MBTI. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Grutter, J. (1998b). Making it in todays organizations: Careet 
enrichment using the Strong and the MBTI. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Grutter, J. (1998c). Making it in todays organizations: Career transi- 
tion using the Strong and the MBTI. Palo Alto, CA: Consult- 
ing Psychologists Press. 

Gryskiewiez, N. D., &amp; Tullar, W. L. (1995). The relationship 
between personality type and creativity style among man- 
agers. Journal of Psychological Type, 32, 30-35. 

Gryskiewicz, S. S. (1982). Creative leadership development and the 
Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory. Paper presented at 
the Occupational Psychology Conference of the British Psy- 
chological Society: “Breaking Set: New Directions in Occu- 
pational Psychology." 

Guild, P B., &amp; Garger, S. (1985). Marching to different drummers. 
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curricu- 
lum Development. 

Hahn-Rollins, D., &amp; Mongeon, J. E. (1988). Increasing the accep- 
tance of the MBTI in organizations. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 15, 13-19. 

Haley, U. C. V. (1997). The MBTI and decision-making styles: 
Identifying and managing cognitive trails in strategic deei- 
sion making. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), Develop- 
ing leaders: Rescarch and applications in psychological type 
and leadership development (pp. 187-223). Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 

Haley, U. C. V, &amp; Pini, R. (1994). Blazing international trails in 
strategic decision-making research. In C. Fitzgerald (Ed.), 


400 MBTI Manual 


Proceedings of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and leadcr- 
ship: An international rescarch conference. College Park, MD: 
National Leadership Institute. 

Hall, W. B., &amp; MacKinnon, D. W. (1969). Personality inventory 
correlates of creativity among architects. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 53 (4), 322-326. 

Hambleton, R. K., Swaminathan, H., &amp; Rogers, H. J. (1991). Fun- 
damentals of item response theory. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Hammer, A. L. (1985). Psychological type and media preferences 
in an adult sample. Journal of Psychological Type, 10, 20-26. 

Hammer, A. L. (1992). Unpublished study. 

Hammer, A. L. (1993). fntroduction to type and careers. Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., (19962). Career management and counseling. In 
A. L. Hammer (Ed, MBTI applications: A decade of research 
on the Mycrs-Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 31—54). Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L. (Ed.). (1996b). MBTI applications: A decade of 
rescarch on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L. (1997). Guide to the Strong and MBTI entrepreneur 
rcport. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 
Hammer, A. L., &amp; Huszczo, G. E. (1996). Teams. In A. L. Hammer 
(Ed), MBTI applications: A decade of research on the Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 81-104). Palo Alto, CA: Consult- 

ing Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1992). Strong and MBTI 
career development guide. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psy- 
chologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1996). Strong and MBTI 
carcer devclopment guide (Rev. ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consult- 
ing Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Macdaid, G. P (19923). Carcer report manual. 
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Macdaid, G. P (1992b). MBTI Career Report: 
Form G. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Marting, M. S. (1987). Coping Resources inven- 
tory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Mitchell, W. D. (1996). The distribution of 
MBTI types in the U.S. by gender and ethnic group. Journal 
of Psychological Type, 37, 2-15. 

Hammer, A. L., Prehn, T., &amp; Mitchell, A. (199+). [Agreement with 
best-fit type.] Unpublished raw data. Palo Alto, CA: Con- 
sulting Psychologists Press. 

Hammer, A. L., &amp; Yeakley, E R. (1987). The relationship between 
"true type" and reported type. Journal of Psychological Type, 
13, 52-55. 

Hannah, B. (1976). Jung: His life and work. New York: Putnam. 

Hardy-Jones, J., &amp; Watson, M. M. (1990). Type differences over 
time: A ten-year study at the University of Hawaii. Journal of 
Psychological Type, 19, 27-34. 

Harmon, L. W., Hansen, J. C., Borgen, E H., &amp; Hammer, A. L, 
(1994). Strong applications and technical guide. Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Harris, À. H., &amp; Carskadon, T. G. (1988). Comparative validity of 
the old and new scoring weights on the MBTI Thinking- 
Feeling scale. Journal of Psychological Type, 15, 54-62. 

Harrison, D. E (1984). The temporal dimensions of Jungs psycholog- 
ical typology: Testing an instructional theory of future studies 
with middle school students. Unpublished doctoral disserta- 
tion, University ol Florida, Gainesville. 

Harrison, D. E, &amp; Lawrence, G. (1985). Psychological type and 
time orientation: Do middle school students differ in pro- 
jecting their personal futures? Journal of Psychological Type, 
9, 10-15. 

Harrison, H. A. (1995). The relationships among Jungian psycho- 
logical type preferences, problems experienced and per- 


ceived problem solving capabilities for African-Americaus 
holding graduate degrees (Doctoral dissertation, Saint 
Louis University). Dissertation. Abstracts. International, 
35/09-A, 2721. 

Hart, H. (1991). Psychological types of students attending a high 
school credit remediation program lor students at risk of 
not graduating. Journal of Psychological Type, 22, 48-51. 

Harvey, R. J. (1996). Reliability and validity. In A. L. Hammer 
(Ed), MBTI Applications: A decade of research on the Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 5-29). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Harvey, R. J. (1997, April). Computer adaptive testing, differential 
item functioning, faking, and the MBTI. In R. J. Harvey 
(Chair), Using item response theory to address assessment 
challenges in I/O. Symposium conducted at the Annual 
Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology, St. Louis, MO. 

Harvey, R. J., &amp; Murry, W. D. (1994). Scoring the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator: Empirical comparison of preference score 
versus latent-trait methods. Journal of Personality Assess- 
ment, 62, 116-129. 

Harvey, R. J., Murry, W. D., &amp; Markham, S. E. (1994). Evaluation 
of three short form versions of the Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor. Journal of Personality Asscssment, 63, 181—184. 

Harvey, R. J., Murry, W. D., &amp; Stamoulis, D. (1995). Unresolved 
issues in the dimensionality of the Myers-Briggs Type fndica- 
tor. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 55, 535—544. 

Harvey, R. J., &amp; Thomas, L. (1996). Using item response theory to 
score the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator: Rationale and 
research findings. Journal of Psychological Type, 37, 16—60. 

Hawkins, C. A., Williams, M. S., &amp; Hawkins R. C., 11 (1990). Psy- 
chological types of social service managers. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 19, 44-49. 

Heavrin, A. R. (1998). Conscious use of the preferred mental func- 
tions in career decision making. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 45, 36-38. 

Held, J. S., &amp; Yokomoto, C. F (1983). Technical report writing: 
Effects of personality differences in the laboratory. ASEE 
Annual Conference Proceedings, 197-201. 

Helson, R. (1965). Childhood interest clusters related to creativity 
in women. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29 (4), 
352-361. 

Helson, R. (1968). Effect of sibling characteristics and parental 
values on creative interest and achievement. Journal of Per- 
sonality, 36 (4), 589-607. 

Helson, R. (1971). Women mathematicians and the creative per- 
sonality. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36 
(2), 210-220. 

Helson, R. (1975, October). Studying typological patterns in “real” 
contexts: Research styles in women mathematicians. Paper 
presented at First National Conference on the Uses of the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicatot, Gainesville, FL. 

Helson, R., &amp; Crutchfield, R. S. (1970). Creative types in mathe- 
matics. Journal of Personality, 38 (2), 177-197. 

Hermon, M. V. (1993). Communication strategies of psychologi- 
cal types. In Proceedings of the Association for Psychological 
Type 10th International Conference. Kansas City, MO: Asso- 
ciation for Psychological Type. 

Hester, C. (1990). The differential performance of MBTI types on 
learning tasks. Journal of Psychological Type, 19, 21-26. 

Hicks, L. E. (1984). Conceptual and empirical analysis of some 
assumptions of an explicitly typological theory. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 46 (5), 1118-1131. 

Hicks, L. E. (1985). Dichotomies and typologies: Summary and 
implications. Journal of Psychological Type, 10, 11-13. 
Hicks, L. E. (1989). Bookishness and the null hypothesis. Journal 

of Psychological Type, 17, 14-19. 


Hill, O. W., &amp; Clark, J. L. (1993). The personality typology of 
Black college students: Evidence for a characteristic cogni- 
tive style? Psychological Reports, 72, 1091-1097. 

Hinkle, K. S. (1986). Au investigation of the relationships among 
learning style preferences, personality types, and mathe- 
matics anxiety of college students (Doctoral dissertation, 
University of Maryland College Park). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, +7/07-A, 2437. 

Hirsh, S. K. (1990). Using the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator in orga- 
nizations. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hirsh, S. K. (1992a). MBTI team building program. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hirsh, S. K. (1992b). Team members guide. Palo Alto, CA: Con- 
sulting Psvchologists Press. 

Hirsh, S. K. (1995). Exploring type with the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator [videotape]. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists 
Press. 

Hirsh, S. K. (1998). Introduction to type and teams. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Hirsh, S. K., &amp; Kise, J. A. G. (1996). Work it out: Clues for solving 
people problems at work. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 
Hirsh, S. K., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1989). LIFETypes. New York: 

Warner Books. 

Hirsh, S. K., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1998). Introduction to type in 
organizations (3rd ed.) Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychol- 
ogists Press. 

Hockersmith, P. E. (1986). A study of the relationships among per- 
sonality, learning and thinking variables of student teachers 
at Shippensburg University (Doctoral dissertation, Temple 
University). Dissertation Abstracts International, 47/08-A, 
3005. 

Hoffman, J. L. (1986). Educational administrators: Psychological 
types. Journal of Psychological Type, 11, 64-67. 

Hofstede, G. (1980). Cultures consequences: International differ- 
ences in work-related values. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software of the 
mind. London: McGraw-Hill 

Holland, J. L. (1994). Separate but unequal is better. In M. L. Sav- 
ickas &amp; R. W. Lent (Eds.), Convergence in carcer develop- 
ment theories: Implications for science and practice. Palo Alto, 
CA: Davies-Black. 

Holsworth, T. E. (1985). Perceptual style correlates for the MBTI. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 10, 32-35. 

Holtzman, E 1. (1989). An examination of the relationship 
between hemispheric dominance and learning styles as 
described bv Keirseyan temperament types (Doctoral dis- 
sertation, University of Tennessee). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 50/04-A, 853. 

Hopkins, L. G. (1997). Relationships between dimensions of per- 
sonality and job satisfaction. Proceedings of APT XII, 83-86. 

Howes, R. J., &amp; Carskadon, T. G. (1979). Test-retest reliabilities of 
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator as a function of mood 
changes. Research in Psychological Type, 2, 67-72. 

Howland, A. (1971). Personal constructs and psychological types. 
Unpublished masters thesis, University of Florida, 
Gainesville. 

Huitt, W. G. (1989). Personality differences between Navajo and 
non-Indian college students: Implications for instruction. 
Equity &amp; Excellence, 24 (1), 71-74. 

Huitt, W. G. (1992). Problem solving and decision making: Con- 
sideration of individual differences using the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator Journal of Psychological Type, 24, 33—44. 

Hulin, C., Drasgow, E, &amp; Parsons, C. (1983). Item responsc thcory: 
Application to psychological measurement. Homewood, IL: 
Dow Jones-lrwin. 

Intravisit, A. (1986). The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator: An application 
to the cross-cultutral study of American and Thai corporate 


References 401 


cultures. Unpublished masters thesis, Long Island Univer- 
sity at C. W. Post. 

Ireland, M. S., &amp; Kernan-Schloss, L. (1983). Pattern analysis of 
recorded daydreams, memories, and personality type. Per- 
ceptual and Motor Skills, 56 (1), 119-125. 

Isachsen, O., &amp; Berens, L. (1991). Working together: A personality 
centcred approach to management (2nd ed.). San Juan Capis- 
trano, CA: Institute for Management Development. 

Jackson, G. S. (1985). The impact of roommates on development: 
A causal analysis of the effects of roonunate personality 
congruence, satisfaction and initial developmental status 
on end-of-quarter developmental status and grade point 
average (Doctoral dissertation, Auburn University). Disscr- 
tation Abstracts International, 46/02-A, 360. 

Jacobson, C. M. (1993). Cognitive styles of creativity: Relatious of 
scores on the Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory and 
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator among managers in USA. 
Psychological Reports, 72, 1131-1138. 

Jaffe, J. M. (1980). The relationship of Jungian psychological pre- 
dispositions to the implementation of management by 
objectives: A sociotechnical perspective (Doctoral disserta- 
tion, University of Southern California). Dissertation Ab- 
stracts International, 41 (11), 48334. 

James, L. R., Mulaik, S. A., &amp; Brett, J. M. (1982). Causal analysis. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Jensen, G. H., &amp; DiTiberio, J. K. (1984). Personality and individ- 
ual writing processes. College Composition and Communica- 
tion, 35, 285-300. 

Jensen, G. H., &amp; DiTiberio, J. K. (1989). Personality and the teach- 
ing of composition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Johnson, C., Zimmerman, A., &amp; Brooker, N. (1994). Implications 
and applications of type theory on a two-year technical col- 
lege campus. Proccedings: Orchestrating Educational Change 
in the 90s—The Role of Psychological Type, 221-234. 

Johnson, D. A. (1992). Test-retest reliabilities of the Mycrs-Briggs 
Type Indicator and the Type Differentiation Indicator over a 
30-month period. Journal of Psychological Type, 24, 54-58. 

Johnson, D. A., &amp; Saunders, D. R. (1990). Confirmatory factor 
analysis of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Expanded Analy- 
sis Report. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 50, 
561—571. 

Johnson, J. A., Sample, J. A., &amp; Jones, W. J. (1988). Self-directed 
learning and personality type in adult degree students. Psy- 
chology: A Journal of Human Behavior, 25, 1, 32-36. 

Johnson, W. M. (1990). A comparative analysis of learning styles 
of Black aud white college freshmen (Doctoral dissertation, 
Oklahoma State University). Dissertation Abstracts Intcrna- 
tional, 50/12-A, 3863. 

Jones, J. H., &amp; Sherman, R. G. (1997). Intimacy and type: A practi- 
cal guide for improving relationships for couples and coun- 
selors. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applicauons of Psycho- 
logical Type. 

Jones, J. H., Ukishima, J., Sakamoto, K., Tanouye, A., &amp; Giron, G. 
(1995). Ethnicity and type of counseling center clients. In 
R. Moody (Ed.), Proceedings of Psychological Type and Cul- 
ture-East and West: A Multicultural Rescarch Symposium (pp. 
77-98). Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psycho- 
logical Type. 

Jóreskog, K. G., &amp; Sorbom, D. (1981). LISREL V: Analysis of lin- 
ear structural relationships by maximum likelihood and least 
squares methods. Chicago, IL: International Educational 
Services. 

Jung, C. G. (1923). Psychological types. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 

Jung, C. G. (1960). The structure and dynamics of the psyche. In 
Collected Warhs, Vol. 8 (R. E C. Hull, Irans.). Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 


402 . MBTI Manual 


Jung, C. G. (1971). Psychological types. in Collected works: Vol. 6 
(R. E C. Hull, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. (Originally published in German as Psychologische 
Typen, Rasher Verlag, Zurich, 1921) 

Jung, C. G. (1971). The structure and dynamics of the psyche. In 
Collected works, Vol. 6 (R. E C. Hull, Trans), 23 (4), 
315-331. 

Kagan, J., &amp; Snidman, N. (1991). Infant predictors of inhibited and 
uninhibited profiles. Psychological Science, 2 (1), 40-43. 

Kainz, R. 1., &amp; MeCaulley, M. H. (1975). [Type differences in 
selection to medical school]. Unpublished raw data. 

Kaiser, K. M. (1981). Use of the fist 50 items as a surrogate mea- 
sure of the Mvers-Briggs Type Indicator Form G. Research in 
Psychological Type, 4, 55-61. 

Kalsbeek, D. (1987). Campus retention: The MBTI in institutional 
self-studies. In J. A. Provost &amp; S. Anchors (Eds.), Applica- 
tions of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator in higher education, 
(pp. 31-63). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Kalsbeek, D., Rodgers, R., Marshall, D., Denny, D., &amp; Nicholls, G. 
(1982). Balancing challenge and support: A study of degrees 
of similarity in suitemate personality type and perceived dif- 
ference in challenge and support in a residence hall environ- 
ment. Journal of College Student Personnel, 23, 434—142. 

Kandell, J. J. (1991). The effects of group homogencity-heterogencity 
based on cognitive style on the quality of group decision mak- 
ing. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Marv- 
land, College Park, MD. 

Karesh, D. M., Pieper, W. A., &amp; Holland, C. L. (1994). Comparing 
the MBTI, the Jungian Iype Survey, and the Singer-Loomis 
Inventory of Personality. Journal of Psychological Type, 30, 
30-38. 

Katzenbach, J. R., &amp; Smith, D. K. (1993). The wisdom of teams. 
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 

Keirsey, D., &amp; Bates, M. (1978). Please understand me: An essay on 
temperament styles. Del Mar, CA: Promethean Books. 

Kelly, E. J. (1991). MBII differences between emotionally dis- 
turbed and conduct disordered students. Journal of Psycho- 
logical Type, 21, 23-34. 

Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs. New 
York: Norton. 

Kendall, B., &amp; Carr, S. (1997). Using the MBTI with management 
simulations. 1n C. Fitzgerald, &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), Devel- 
oping leaders: Research and applications in psyehologieal type 
and leadership development. (pp. 361-380). Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 

Kendall, B., © MeHenry, R. (1998). Technical supplement to the 
MBTI Manual. Oxford, UK: Oxford Psychologists Press. 

Kilburg, R. R. (Ed). (1996). Executive coaching [Special issue]. 
Consulting Psychology Journal, 48 (2). 

Kilmann, R. H., &amp; Thomas, K. W. (1975). Interpersonal conflict- 
handling behavior as reflections of Jungian personality 
dimensions. Psychological Reports, 37, 971—980. 

Kirby, L. K. (1997). Introduction: Psychological type and the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby 
(Eds.), Developing leaders: Research and applications in psy- 
chological type and leadership development (pp. 3-32). Palo 
Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Kirby, L. K., &amp; Barger, N. J. (1996). Multicultural applications. In 
A. L. Hammer (Ed.), MBTI applications: A decade of research 
on the Mvers-Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 167—196). Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Kirton, M. J. (1987). Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory 
(KAI) manual (2nd ed.). Harfield, UK: Occupational 
Research Center. 

Knapp, R. H., &amp; Lapuc, P. S. (1965). Time imagery, introversion 
and fantasied preoccupations in simulated isolation. Percep- 
tual and Motor Skills, 20, 327—330. 


Komisin, L. K. (1992). Personality type and suicidal behaviors in 
college students. Journal of Psychological Type, 24, 24-32. 

Krumboltz, J. D. (1991). Revised Career Beliefs Inventory manual. 
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Krumboltz, J. D. (1992). Comment: The wisdom of indecision. 
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 41, 239—244. 

Krumboltz, J. D. (1996). A learning theory of career counseling. In 
M. L. Savickas &amp; W. B. Walsh (Eds.). Handbook of career 
counseling theory and practice. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Kuhn, I. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Kummerow, J. M. (1986). Verifying vour type preferences. Gainesville, 
FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

Kummerow, J. M. (1987). Talking in type. [Handout]. Gainesville, 
FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

Kummerow, J. M. (1988). A methodology for verifying type: 
Research results. Journal of Psychological Type, 15, 20-25. 

Kummerow, J. M., Barger, N. J., &amp; Kirby, L. K. (1997). WORK- 
Types, New York: Warner Books. 

Kummerow, J. M., &amp; Hammer, A. L. (1995). Strong and MBTI 
career development workbook. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Kummerow, J. M., &amp; Quenk, N. L. (1992). Interpretive guide for the 
MBTI expanded analysis report. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Kyle, J. (1985). A study of the influence of psychological type and 
locus of control on the academic performance of students 
(Doctoral dissertation, George Peabody College for Teachers 
of Vanderbilt University). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
+6/08-A, 2236. 

Lamphere, G. I. (1985). The relationship between teacher and stu- 
dent personality and its effects on teacher perception of stu- 
dent (Doctoral dissertation, United States International Uni- 
versity). Dissertation Abstracts International, 46/06-A, 1564. 

Lathey, J. W. (1991). Temperament style as a predictor of academic 
achievement in early adolescence. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 22, 52-58. 

Lawrence, G. (n.d.). Zig-zag process for problem solving. [Hand- 
out]. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psycholog- 
ical Type. 

Lawrence, G. (1982). People types and tiger stripes. Gainesville, FL: 
Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

Lawrence, G. (1984). A synthesis of learning style research involv- 
ing the MBTI. Journal of Psychological Type, 8, 2-15. 

Lawrence, G., &amp; Martin, C. R. (1996) Profile of your MBTI results. 
[Handout]. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psy- 
chological Type. 

Lehto, B. A. (1990). A comparison of personalities and back- 
ground of teachers using a whole language approach and a 
basal approach in teaching elementary reading (Doctoral 
dissertation, Michigan State University). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 51/03-A, 740. 

Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., &amp; Hackett, G. (1996). Social develop- 
ment from a social cognitive perspective. In D. Brown &amp; L. 
Brooks (Eds.), Career choice and development (3rd ed.). San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Levell, J. P (1965). Secondary school counselors: A study of differ- 
entiating characteristics (Doctoral dissertation, University 
of Oregon). Dissertation Abstracts International, 26, 4452. 
(University Microfilms No. 65-12, 227) 

Levin, A. S., Krumboltz, J. D., &amp; Krumboltz, B. L. (1995). Explor- 
ing your career beliefs: A workbook for the Carcer Beliefs 
Inventory with techniques for integrating vour Strong and 
MBTI results. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists 
Press. 

Levin, L. S. (1978). Jungian personality variables of psycho- 
therapists of different theoretical orientations (Doctoral dis- 
sertation, University of Oregon). Dissertation Abstracts 


International, 39, 4042B—40-GB. (University Microfilms No. 
79-01, 823) 

Levine, D. M. (1988). Jungian personality type and recreational 
reading patterns (Doctoral dissertation, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill). Dissertation Abstracts. Interna- 
tional, 58/1 2-B, 3716. 

Levy, N., Murphy, C., &amp; Carlson, R. (1972). Personality types 
among Negro college students. Educational and Psychologi- 
cal Measurement, 32, 641—653. 

Levy, N., &amp; Ostrowski, B. (1983). 4 comparison of the Jungian 
personality types among Hawaiians of Japanese and Cau- 
casian ancestry. Research in Psychological Type, 6, 54-57. 

Lewis, R. M.. Tobacyk, J. J.. Dawson, L. E., Jurkus, A. E, &amp; Means, 
T. L. (1996). Psychological types of male multi-line insur- 
ance agents. Journal of Psychological Type, 39, 37-39. 

Liddell, D. L., Halpin, G., &amp; Halpin. W. G. (1992). The measure of 
moral orientation: Measuring the ethics of care and justice. 
Journal of College Student Development, 33, 4, 325-330. 

Lidgard, C. E. &amp; Bates, N. W. (1988). Do police departments in Aus- 
tralia, U.S.A., and the United Kingdom recruit different types 
of police officers? Paper presented at the 24th International 
Congress of Psychology, Sydney, Australia. 

Lim, T. K. (1994). Personality types among Singapore and Ameri- 
can students. Journal of Psychological Type, 31, 10-15. 
Loomis, M. E. (1991). Dancing the whecl of psychological types. 

Wilmette, lL: Chiron. 

Lueder, D. L. (1986). The “Rising Stars” in educational adminis- 
tration: A corollary to psychological types and leadership 
styles. Journal of Psychological Type, 12, 13-15. 

Luh, S. P. (1991). A study of lcarning styles, personality types and 
brain hemispheric preferences of teacher education majors 
(Doctoral dissertation, Drake University). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 51/1 2-A, 4067. 

Lund, S. L. (1995). Where personality meets culture: Leveraging 
personal and cultural diversity to improve organizational 
communication and teamwork. In Proceedings of Associa- 
tion for Psychological Type 11th International Conference (pp. 
129-130). Kansas City, MO: Association for Psychological 
Type 

Lynch, A. Q., &amp; Sellers, P A. (1996). Preferences for different cdu- 
cational environments and psychological type: A compari- 
son of adult lcarners and traditional age college students. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 39, 18-29. 

Macdaid, G. P. (1984a). Types of volunteer phone counselors in a 
crisis center. Unpublished paper. 

Macdaid, G. P (1984b). Recommended uses of the abbreviated ver- 
sion (Form AV) of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and com- 
parisons with Form G. Journal of Psychological Type, 7, 49—55. 

Macdaid, G. P, Kainz, R. 1., &amp; McCaulley, M. H. (1984). The Uni- 
versity of Florida longitudinal study: A ten-year follow-up. 
Unpublished paper. 

Macdaid, G. P, McCaulley, M. H., &amp; Kainz, R. I. (1986). Mvers- 
Briggs Type Indicator atlas of type tables. Gainesville, FL: 
Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

MacKinnon, D. W. (1960). The highly cffective individual. Teach- 
ers College Record, 61, 367-378. 

MacKinnon, D. W. (1962a). The nature and nurture of creative tal- 
ent. American Psychologist, 17, 484—195. 

MacKinnon, D. W. (1962b). The personality correlates of creativ- 
ity: A study of American architects. In G. S. Nielsen (Ed.), 
Personality Research, Proceedings of the XIV International 
Congress of Applied Psychology, 2, 11-39. 

Mackinnon, D. W. (1965). Personality and the realization of cre- 
ative potential. American Psychologist, 20, 273-28}. 

Mackinnon, D. W. (1971). Creativity and the transliminal experi- 
ence. Journal of Creative Behavior, 5 (4), 227—241. 

Mann, H., Siegler, M., &amp; Osmond, H. (1968). The many worlds of 
time. Journal of Analytical Psychology, 13 (1), 33-56. 


References 403 


Mann, H., Sicgler, M., &amp; Osmond, H. (1971). The psychotypology 
of time. ín H. Yaker, H Osmond, &amp; F Check (Eds.), The 
future of time: Mans temporal environment (pp. 142-178). 
Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 

Manske, D. H. (1988). A study of the relationship of preference 
scores on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and the reading 
comprehension of adult readers (Doctoral dissertation, 
Memphis State University). Dissertation Abstracts Interna- 
tional, 49/02-A, 227. 

Marcus, S. K. (1976). Jungian typology and time orientation (Doc- 
toral dissertation, United States International University). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 37(03), 1HO9B. (Univer- 
sity Microhlms No. 76-19-756) 

Marioles, N., Striekert, D. P, Babcock, R. B., Campbell, B. R.. &amp; 
Cortner, R. H. (1997, July). Type and couples: Part three. 
Paper presented at the XH International Conference of the 
Association for Psychological Type, Boston, MA. 

Marioles, N. S., Hammer, A. L., Strickert, D. P, Adams, J., Cortner, 
R. H., &amp; Mareth, T. (1995). Type and couples: Part 2. Paper 
presented at the XI meeting of the Association for Psycho- 
logical Type, Kansas City, MO. 

Marioles, N. S., Strickert, D. P, &amp; Hammer, A. L. (1996). Attrac- 
tion, sausfaction, and psychological types of couples. Jour- 
nal of Psychological Type, 36, 16—27. 

Marrott, G. (1981), The nature of insight: A conceptual and 
empirical exploration of the insightful person. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. University of California. 

Marshall, N. J. (1971). Orientations toward privacy: Environmen- 
tal and personality components (Doctoral dissertation. Uni- 
versity of California). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
31, 4315B. (University Microhlms No. 71-815) 

Maslach, C., Jackson, S. E., &amp; Leiter, M. P. (1996). Maslach 
Burnout Inventory Manual (3rd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consult- 
ing Psychologists Press. 

May, A. O. (1992). The learning stvles, personality and tempera- 
ment types of eighth and twelfth-grade urban African- 
American and white students: A comparative study (Doc- 
toral dissertation, Seattle University). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 52/07-A, 2472. 

May, D. C. (1972). An investigation of the relationship between 
selected personality characteristics of eighth-grade students 
and their achievement in mathematics (Doctoral disserta- 
tion, University of Florida). Dissertation Abstracts Interna- 
tional, 33/02-A, 555. 

McCarley, N. G., &amp; Carskadon, T G. (1983). Test-retest reliabili- 
ties of scales and subscales of the Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor and of criteria for clinical interpretive hypotheses 
involving them. Rescarch in Psychological Type, 6, 24-36. 

McCarley, N. G., &amp; Carskadon, T. G. (1986). The perceived accu- 
racy of elements of the 16 type descriptions of Myers and 
Kcirsey among men and women: Which elements are most 
accurate, should the type descriptions be different for men 
and women, and do the type descriptions stereotype sens- 
ing types? Journal of Psychological Type, 11, 2-29. 

McCary, P W. (1970). The effects of small self-understanding 
groups on the self-concept and anxiety level when group 
composition has been varied (Doctoral dissertation, Uni- 
versity of Michigan). Dissertation Abstracts International, 31. 
2112A. (University Microhlms No. 70-20, 491) 

McCaulley, M. H. (1977). The Myers Longitudinal Medical Study 
(Monograph 11). Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of 
Psychological Type. 

McCaulley, M. H. (1978). Application of the Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor to medicine and. other health professions (Monograph 1). 
Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

McCaulley, M. H. (1985). The selection ratio type table: A rescarch 
strategy for comparing type distributions. Journal of Psycho- 
logical Type, 10, +6-56. 


40-4 MBTI Manual 


McCaulley, M. H. (19903). The MBTI and individual pathways in 
engineering design. Engineering Education, 80, 537—542. 

McCaulley, M. H. (1990b). The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator in 
counscling. Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psy- 
chological Type. 

McCaulley, M. H., Godleski, E. S., Yokomoto, C. E, Harrisberger, 
L., &amp; Sloan, E. D. (1983). Applications of psychological 
type in engineering education. Engincering Education, 73, 5, 
394—400. 

McCaulley, M. H., &amp; Kainz, R. I. (1974). The University of Florida 
longitudinal studv: First follow-up. Unpublished paper. 
McCaulley, M. H., &amp; Kainz, R. 1 (1976). [MBTI and achievement 

in a Florida middle school.] Unpublished raw data. 

McCaulley, M. H., Macdaid, G. P, &amp; Granade, J. G. (1993). Career 
satisfaction and type: A working paper. Gainesville, FL: Cen- 
ter for Applications of Psychological Type. 

McCaulley, M. H., Macdaid, G. P, &amp; Magidson, J. (1997). Introduc- 
ing a new graphical modeling technique for profiling type 
tables. Paper presented at the Association of Psychological 
Type XI, Boston, MA. 

McCaulley, M. H., Macdaid, G. P, &amp; Walsh, R. (1987). Myers- 
Briggs Type indicator and retention in engineering. Interna- 
tional Journal of Applied Engineering, 3, 2, 99-109. 

McCaulley, M. H., &amp; Natter, E L. (1974). Psychological (Myers- 
Briggs) type differences in education. In E L. Natter &amp; 5. A. 
Rollins (Eds.), The governors task force on disruptive youth: 
Phase 1I report. Tallahassee, FL: Office of the Governor. 

McCrae, R. R., &amp; Costa, P. T., Jr. (1989). Reinterpreting the Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator from the perspective of the five-factor 
model of personality. Journal of Personality, 57 (1), 17—40. 

Meisgeier, C. H., &amp; Meisgeier, C. (1989). A parents guide to typc. 
Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psychological 
Type. 

Meisgcier, C. H., &amp; Murphy, E. (1987). Murphy-Meisgcier Type 
Indicator for Children manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psvchologists Press. 

Meisgeier, C. H., Murphy, E., &amp; Meisgeier, C. (1989). A teachers 
guide to type. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Meisgeier, C. H., Poillion, M. J., &amp; Haring, K. (1994). The relation 
between ADHD and Jungian psychological type: Common- 
ality in Jungian psychological type preferences among stu- 
dents with Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder. Pro- 
cecdings: Orchestrating Educational Change in the 908—The 
Role of Psychological Type, 285-304. 

Melear, C. T., &amp; Richardson, S. (1994). Learning styles of African 
American children which correspond to the MBTI. Procced- 
ings: Orchestrating Educational Change in thc 90—Thc Role 
of Psychological Type, 11-22. 

Mendelsohn, G. A. (1966). Effects of client personality and client- 
counselor similarity on the duration of counseling: A repli- 
cation and extension. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 13 
(2), 228-232. 

Mendelsohn, G. A., &amp; Geller, M. H. (1963). Effects of counselor- 
client similarity on the outcome of counseling. Journal of 
Counscling Psychology, 10 (1), 71-77. 

Mendelsohn, G. A., &amp; Geller, M. H. (1965). Structure of client 
attitudes toward counseling and their relation to client- 
counselor similarity. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 29 
(D, 63-72. 

Mendelsohn, G. A., &amp; Geller, M. H. (1967). Similarity, missed ses- 
sions, and early termination. Journal of Counseling Psychol- 
ogy, 14 (3), 210-215. 

Mendelsohn, G. A., &amp; Kirk, B. A. (1962). Personality differences 
between students who do and do not use a counseling facil- 
ity. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 9 (4), 341-346. 

Mendelsohn, G. A., Weiss, D. S., &amp; Feimer, N. R. (1982). Concep- 
tual and empirical analysis of the typological implications 


of patterns of socialization and femininity. Journal of Person- 
ality and Social Psychology, 42 (6), 1157-1170. 

Metts, V. L. (1995). Team type diversity and team effectiveness. 
Paper presented at the 11th International Conference of the 
Association for Psychological Type, Kansas City, MO. 

Millner, N. B., (1998). Creative aging: Discovering the unexpected 
jovs of later life through personality type. Palo Alto, CA: 
Davies-Black. 

Millon, T. (1994). Millon Index of Personality Styles manual. San 
Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation. 

Mills, C. J., Moore, N. J., &amp; Parker, W. D. (1996). Psychological 
type and cognitive style in elementary-age gifted students: 
Comparisons across age and gender. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 38, 13-23. 

Mills, J., Robey, D., &amp; Smith, L. (1985). Conflict-handling and 
personality dimensions of project-management personnel. 
Psychological Reports, 57, 1135-1143. 

Miner, M. G., &amp; Hyman, l. A. (1988). Psychological types of sec- 
ondary teachers and their ratings of the seriousness of stu- 
dent misbehaviors. Journal of Psychological Type, 14, 25-31. 

Minnesota Department of Economic Security. (1997). From thc 
DOT to O*NET: Taking occupational information into the next 
century. Unpublished manuscript. 

Mitchell, W. D. (in press). MBTI Step I! manual. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Mitchell, W. D. (1981). Type and social climate in a large organiza- 
tion. Unpublished manuscript. 

Mitchell, W. D., with Quenk, N. L., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1997). 
MBTI Step l: A description of the subscales. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Molpus, D. (1997, December 9). A leadership and the people issues, 
All Things Considered. Upper Marlboro, MD: National Pub- 
lic Radio. 

Montross, D. H., Leibowitz, Z. B., &amp; Shinkman, C. J. (1995). Real 
people real jobs: Reflecting your interests in the world of work. 
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Moody, R. (1988). Personality preferences and foreign language 
learning. The Modern Language Journal, 72, +, 389—401. 

Moore, D., &amp; Bayne, R. (1997). Preference for sensing or intuition 
and reading for pleasure. Journal of Psychological Type, 41, 
38-42. 

Moore, L. S., Dietz, T. J., &amp; Jenkins, D. A. (1997). Teaching about 
self-awareness: Using the MBTI to enhance professionalism in 
social work education. Journal of Psychological Type, 43, 5-11. 

Most, R. B. (1984). [A test-retest comparison of Form AV and Form 
G of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator] Unpublished raw data. 

Murphy, E. (1992). The developing child: Using Jungian type to under- 
stand children. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Murphy, F. (1997). Coping, adjusting, accommodating, and foster- 
ing the development of type differences in families. In Pro- 
ceedings: APT XII Biennial International Conference, Boston, 
MA. 

Murphy, E., &amp; Meisgeier, C. H. (1987). Murphy-Meisgeier Type 
Indicator for Children. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psycholo- 
gists Press. 

Murry, W. D., Magidson, J., &amp; Markham, S. E. (1997). The MBTI 
cognitive functions: Using latent class and trait theory to 
examine the dominant and auxiliary. Paper presented at the 
12th International Conference of the Association for Psy- 
chological Type, Boston, MA. 

Murry, W. D., &amp; Markham, S. E. (1997). The MBTI and work val- 
ues: The role of personality in shaping an organizations cul- 
ture. In APT XU Proceedings, 165-170. 

Myers, I. B. (1962). Manual: The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. 
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Myers, l. B. (1974). Type and teamwork. Gainesville, FL: Center 
for Applications of Psychological Type. 


Myers, 1. B. (1977). In M. H. MeCaulley, The Mycrs longitudinal 
medical study (Monograph 11). Gainesville, FL: Center for 
Applications of Psychological Type. 

Myers, l. B., with Kirby, L. K., &amp; Myers, K. D. (1998). Introduction to 
type (6th ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Myers, 1. B., &amp; McCaulley, M. H: (1985). Manual: A guide to the 
development and usc of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Myers, I. B., with Myers, P B. (1995). Gifts differing: Understanding 
personality type. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. (original work 
published in 1980) 

Myers, K. D. (nd). Decision making and type. [Handout]. 
Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psychological 
Type. 

Myers, K. D., &amp; Kirby L. K. (1994). Introduction to type dynamics 
and development: Exploring the next level of type. Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Nechworth, J. A., &amp; Carskadon, T. G. (1979). Experimental vali- 
dation of an assumption underlying the clinical interpreta- 
tion of discrepancies between Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
scores computed separately from word-pair and phrased 
question items. Research in Psychological Type, 2, 56-59. 

Neral, S. M. (1989). Determining whether a predictive relation- 
ship exists between noncognitive characteristics and acadc- 
mic achievement levels of freshman medical students (Doc- 
toral dissertation, Mississippi State University). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 50/04-A, 906. 

Newman, J. (1985). Hemisphere specialization and Jungian typol- 
ogy-evidence for a relationship. Bulletin of Psychological 
Type, 10 (2), 13, 25-27. 

Newman, L. E. (1979). Personality types of therapist and client 
and their use in counseling. Research in Psychological Type, 
2, 46-55. 

Nightingale, J. A. (1973). The relationship of Jungian type to death 
concern and time perspective (Doctoral dissertation, Univer- 
sity of South Carolina). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
33, 3956B. (University Microfilms No. 73-3609) 

Noer, D. M. (1993). Hcaling the wounds. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

O'Haire, T. D., &amp; Marcia, J. E. (1980). Some personality character- 
istics associated with Ananda Marga meditations: A pilot 
study. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 51, 447—452. 

Ohsawa, T. (1975, October). MBTI experiences in Japan: Carcer 
choice, selection, placement, and counseling for individual 
development. Paper presented at the 1st National Confer- 
ence on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, Gainesville, FL. 

Ohsawa, T. (1981). A profile of top executives of Japanese companics. 
Paper presented at the 4th National Conference on the Mycrs- 
Briggs Type Indicator, Palo Alto, CA. 

Osborn, T. N. , Osborn, D. B., &amp; Twillman, B. (1996). MBTI, FIRO- 
B, and NAFTA: Psychological profiles of not-so-distant busi- 
ness neighbors. Journal of Psychological Type, 36, 3-15. 

O'Shea, T., &amp; Mamchur, C. (1989). Using a loglinear model to 
analyze MBTI distributions. Journal of Psychological Type, 
17, 56-65. 

Oswick, C., &amp; Mahoney, J. P. (1993). Psychological types of first- 
line supervisors in the United Kingdom: A comparison of 
U.S. and U.K. managers. Journal of Psychological Type, 25, 
31-38. 

Oswick, C., Mahoney, J. P, &amp; Stein, P. (1994). The fit between 
organizational culture and employee personality: Case evi- 
dence from three diverse organizations. In Proceedings of 
the Third International Conference on Mycrs-Briggs Typology 
(pp. 99-108). Montreal, Canada: International Type Users 
Organization. 

Otis, G. D., &amp; Louks, J. L. (1997). Rebelliousness and psychologi- 
cal distress in a sample of Introverted veterans. Journal of 
Psychological Type, 40, 20-30. 


References 405 





Otis, G. D., &amp; Quenk, N. L. (1989). Care and justice considera- 
tions in "real life" moral problems. Journal of Psychological 
Iype, 18, 3-10. 

Owen, C. (1962). An investigation of creative potential at the 
junior high level. Studies in Art Education, 3, 16-22. 

Oxford Psychologists Press (1993). Reported to best-fit type: 
Changes during the Oxford Psychologists Press qualifying 
workshops, February 199]—April 1993. Unpublished report. 

Oxford, R., &amp; Ehrman, M. (1988). Psychological type and adult 
language learning strategies: A pilot study. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 16, 22-32. 

Oxford, R., Nyikos, M., &amp; Ehrman, M. (1988). Vive la difference? 
Reflections on sex differences in use of language learning 
strategies. Foreign Language Annals, 2], 4, 321-329. 

Palmiere, L. (1972). Intro-Extra-version as an organizing principle 
in fantasy production. Journal of Analytical Psychology, 17 
(2), 116-131. 

Park, J. S. (1996). Paper presented at Psychological Type and Cul- 
ture-East and West: A Multicultural Research Symposium. 
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu. 

Pearman, R. R. (1993). Diversity denied: Type bias in manager selec- 
tion. Paper presented at the 11th international conference of 
the Association for Psychological Type, Kansas City, MO. 

Pearman, R. R., &amp; Albritton, S. C. (1997). fm not crazy, Em just 
not vou: The rcal meaning of the sixtcen personality types. 
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Pearman, R. R., &amp; Fleenor, J. (1996). Differences in observed and 
self-reported qualities of psychological types. Journal of Psy- 
chological Tvpe, 39, 3-17. 

Penley, J. P, &amp; Stephens, D. W. (1994). The M.O.M.S" Handbook: 
Understanding your personality type in mothering. Gainesville, 
FL: Center for Applications of Psychological Type. 

Penn, B. K. (1992). Correlations among learning styles, clinical 
specialities, and personality types of U.S. Army nurses 
(Doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at Austin). Dis- 
scrtation Abstracts International, 53/02-A, 393. 

Percival, T. Q., Smitheram, V, &amp; Kelly, M. (1992). Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator and conflict-handling intention: An interac- 
tive approach. Journal of Psychological Type, 23, 10-16. 

Perelman, S. G. (1978). A phenomenological investigation of the 
counselors personal experience of his counseling practice 
and its relationship to specific constructs in Jungian analyti- 
cal psychology (Doctoral dissertation, University of Pitts- 
burg). Dissertation Abstracts International, 38, 5258A. (Uni- 
versity Microfilms No. 7801874) 

Perry, H. W. (1975). Interrelationships among selected personality 
variables of psychologists and their professional orientation 
(Doctoral dissertation, Notre Dame University). Disserta- 
tion Abstracts International, 35. 6080B. (University Micro- 
films No. 75-13,100) 

Peterson, L. (1995). Starting out, starting over: Finding the work 
thats waiting for vou. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Petty, M. L. (1985). A profile of college student leaders relating 
personality types, learning styles, and leadership 
approaches (Doctoral dissertation, Florida State Univer- 
sity). Dissertation Abstracts International, 46/12-A, 3621. 

Pollard, C. K. (1989). The relationship of GPA to personality fac- 
tors of students as measured by the MBTI and the 16PF 
(Doctoral dissertation, Baylor University). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 49/10-A, 3006. 

Power, S. J., &amp; Lundsten, L. L. (1997). Studies that compare type 
theory and left-brain/right brain theory. Journal of Psycho- 
logical Type, 43, 22-28. 

Price, P. M. (1993). An examination of response to literature and 
Myers-Briggs personality preferences in high-ability sec- 
ondary school students (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Virginia). Dissertation Abstracts International, 54/05-A, 1660. 


406 MBTI Manual 


Pritchett, P. (n.d.). The emplovee handbook of new work habits for a 
radically changing world: 13 ground rules for job success in 
the information age. Dallas, TX: Pritchett &amp; Associates, Inc. 

Provost, J. A. (1985). Type watching and college attrition. Journal 
of Psychological Type, 9, 16-23. 

Provost, J. A. (1990). Work, play, and type: Achieving balance in 
your life. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Provost, J. A. (1991). Tracking freshman difficulties in the class of 
1993. Journal of Psychological Type, 21, 35-39. 

Provost, J. A. (1992). Strategies for success: Using type to do better 
in high school and college. Gainesville, FL: Center for the 
Applications of Psychological Type. 

Provost, J. A. (1993). Applications of the Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor in counscling: A casebook. Gainesville, FL: Center for 
Applications of Psychological Type. 

Provost, J.A. &amp; Anchors, S. (1987). Student involvement and 
activities. In J. A. Provost &amp; S. Anchors (Eds.), Applications 
of the Mycrs-Briggs Type Indicator in higher cducation (pp. 
91-106). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Provost, J. A., Carson, B. H., &amp; Beidler, P. G. (1987b). Teaching 
excellence and type. Journal of Psychological Type, 13, 23-33. 

Quenk, A. T. (1985a). Psychological types and psychotherapy. 
Gainesville, FL: Center for Applications of Psychological 
Type. 

Quenk, A. T., and Quenk, N. L. (1982). The use of psychological 
typology in analysis. In M. Stein (Ed, Jungian analysis. La 
Salle, IL: Open Court Press. 

Quenk, N. L. (1966). Fantasv and personal outlook: A study of 
daydreaming as a function of optimism, pessimism, realism 
and anxiety (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, 
Berkeley). Disscrtation Abstracts International, 27, 970B. 
(University Microfilms No. 66-8364) 

Quenk, N. L. (1985b). Directionality of the auxiliary function. 
Bulletin of Psychological Type, 8, (1). 

Quenk, N. L. (1989). Jungs theorv of psychological types and the 
sclf-contained patient. In E. M. Stern (Ed.), Psychotherapy 
and the sclf-contained patient. New York: Haworth Press. 

Quenk, N. L. (1993). Beside ourselves: Our hidden personality in 
everyday life. Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Quenk, N. L. (1996). In the grip: Our hidden personality. Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Quenk, N. L., &amp; Albert, M. (1975). A taxonomy of physician work 
scttings (Study Report #2 to Bureau of Health Resources 
Development, Health Resource Administration, Contract 
No. 1-MI-24197). Albuquerque, NM: University of New 
Mexico. 

Quenk, N. L., &amp; Kummerow, J. M. (1996). MBTI Step U expanded 
interpretive report: Form K. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psy- 
chologists Press. 

Quenk, N. L., &amp; Quenk, A. T. (1996). Counseling and psy- 
chotherapy. In A. 1.. Hammer (Ed.), MBTI applications: A 
decade of rescarch on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 
105-122). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Random House dictionary of the English language (2nd ed., 
unabridged). (1987). New York: Random House. 

Reynierse, J. H. (1993). The distribution and llow of managerial 
types through organizational levels in business and indus- 
try. Journal of Psychological Type, 25, 11-23. 

Revnierse, J. H. (1997). An MBTI model of entrepreneurism and 
burcaucracy: The psychological types of business entrepre- 
neurs compared to business managers and executives. Jour- 
nal of Psychological Tvpe, 40, 3-19. 

Reyniersc, J. H., &amp; Harker, J. B. (1995). The psychological types of 
line and staff management: Implications for the J-P prefer- 
ence. Journal of Psychological Ivpe, 34, 8-16. 

Rich, B. (1972). A correlational study of the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator and thc Jungian Type Survey. Unpublished paper. 


Rigley, D. A. (1993). The relationship between personality type, 
academic major selection and persistence (Doctoral disser- 
tation, Hlinois State University). Disscrtation Abstracts Inter- 
national, 54/04-A, 1333. 

Roberds-Baxter, S. L., &amp; Baxter, W. D. (1994). Student MBTI type- 
characteristic behavior: Correlations with the Adjective 
Check List and teacher and school psychologist judgment of 
social acceptance and emotional health. In Proceedings: 
Orchestrating Educational Change in the 9085—The Role of 
Psychological Type, 305—319. 

Robinson, D. C. (1994). Uses of type with the 1990 United States 
Academic Decathlon program. In Proceedings: Orchestrating 
Educational Change in the 90s—The Role of Psychological 
Type, 35-41. 

Rollock, D., &amp; Terrel, M. D. (1996). Multicultural issues in assess- 
ment: Toward an inclusive model. In J. L. Delucia-Waack 
(Ed.), Multicultural counscling compctencies: Implications for 
training and practice (pp. 113-153). Alexandria, VA: Associ- 
ation for Counselor Education and Supervision. 

Rosati, P. (1997). Psychological types of Canadian engineering 
students. Journal of Psychological Type, 41, 33-37. 

Rosin, P. L. (1995). A psychological type comparison of Cree and 
non-native junior high students: Implications for education 
(Masters thesis, University of Alberta). Masters Abstracts 
International, 33/01 , 37. 

Ross, J. (1961). Progress report on the College Student Characteris- 
tics Study: June 1961 (Research Memorandum 61-11). 
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Ross, S. 1. (1994). The relationship between cognitive style and 
academic achievement in African-American high school 
students (Doctoral dissertation, Fordham University). Dis- 
scrtation Abstracts International, 55/04-A , 914. 

Roush, P. L. E. (1989). MBTI type and voluntary attrition at the 
United Statcs Naval Academy. Journal of Psychological Type, 
18, 72-79. 

Ruane, E V. (1973). An investigation of the relationship of 
response modes in the perception of paintings to selected 
variables (Doctoral dissertation, Pennsylvania State Univer- 
sity). Dissertation Abstracts International, 34, 5031A. (Uni- 
versity Microfilms No. 74-4285) 

Ruble, V. E., Mahan, M. P, &amp; Schurr, K. T. (1987). Multiple uses of 
the MBTI within an athletic program. Paper presented at the 
4th Annual Conference on Counseling Athletes, Spring- 
held, MA. 

Ruhl, D. L., &amp; Rodgers, R. E (1992). The perceived accuracy of the 
16 type descriptions of Myers and Keirsey: A replication of 
McCarley and Carskadon. Journal of Psychological Type, 23, 
22-26. 

Ruppart, R. (1985). Psychological types and occupational choices 
among rcligious professionals: A psychosocial, historical perspec- 
tive. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, New York University: 

Russel, M. T., &amp; Karol, D. L. (1994). 16PF fifth edition administra- 
tors manual. Champaign, IL: Institute for Ability and Per- 
sonality Testing. 

Rytting, M., Ware, R., &amp; Prince, R. A. (1994). The impact of fam- 
ily ownership and CEO type on the character of companies. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 31, 32-40. 

Samovar, L. A., &amp; Porter, R. E. (Eds). (1991). Intercultural com- 
munication: A reader (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 

Sample, J. A., &amp; lloffman, J. L. (1986). The MBTI as a manage- 
ment and organizational development tool. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 11, 47-50. l 

Satava, D. (1996). Personality types of CPAs: National vs. local 
firms. Journal of Psychological Type, 36, 36-41. 

Satava, D. (1997). Extraverts or Introverts: Who supervises the 
most CPA staff members? Journal of Psychological Type, 43, 
40-43. 


Relerences 407 





Saunders, D. R. (1987). Type differentiation indicator manual. Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Saunders, D. R. (1989). MBTI Expanded Analysis Report manual. 
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Saunders, E W. (1991). Katharine and Isabel: Mothers light, daugh- 
ters journey Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Schacht, A. J., Howe, H. E., &amp; Berman, J. J. (1989). Supervisor facil- 
itative conditions and effectiveness as perceived hy Thinking- 
and Feeling-tvpe supervisees. Psychotherapy, 26, 475-483. 

Schadt, D. O. (1997). The relationship of type to developmental 
issues of midlife women: Implications for counseling. Jour- 
nal of Psychological Type, 43, 12-21. 

Schaefer, G. 1.. (1994). Relationship of Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
personality profiles to academic sclf-esteem (Doctoral dis- 
sertation, University of the Pacific). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 55/05-A, 1228. 

Scherdin, M. J. (1994). Vive la difference: Exploring librarian per- 
sonality types using the MBTI. In M. J. Scherdin (Ed.), Dis- 
covering librarians: Profiles of a profession. Chicago: Associa- 
tion of College and Research Libraries, American Library 
Association. 

Schilling, K. L. (1972). Myers-Briggs Type tndicator and the helping 
person. Unpublished masters thesis, University of Florida, 
Gainesville. 

Schnell, E. R., @ Hammer, A. L. (1997). Integrating the FIRO-B 
with the MBTI: Relationships, case examples, and interpre- 
tation strategies. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), 
Developing leaders: Research and applications in psvchological 
type and leadership development (pp. 439—464). Palo Alto, 
CA: Davies-Black. 

Scholl, J. S. (1975). Tash performance of small groups composed on 
the basis of Jungs psychological types (Doctoral dissertation, 
Temple University). Dissertation Abstracts International, 75 
28), 141A, 

Schroeder, C. C., &amp; Jackson, S. (1987). Designing residential envi- 
ronments. In J. A. Provost &amp; S. Anchors (Eds.), Applications 
of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator in higher education, (pp. 
65-88). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Schurr, K. T., Henriksen, L. W., Alcorn, B. K., &amp; Dillard, N. 
(1992). Tests and psychological types for nurses and teach- 
ers: Classroom achievement and standardized test scores 
measuring specific training objectives and general ability. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 23, 38—44. 

Schurr, K. T., Houlette, F, &amp; Ellen, A. (1986). The effects of 
instructors and student Myers-Briggs Type Indicator charac- 
teristics on the accuracy of grades predicted for an intro- 
ductory English composition course. Educational and Psy- 
chological Measurement, 46, +, 989-1000. 

Schurr, K. T., &amp; Ruble, V. E. (1986). The Myers-Briggs Type Indica- 
tor and first- -year college achievement: A look beyond apti- 
tude test results. Journal of Psychological Type, 12, 25-37. 

Schurr, K. T., &amp; Ruble, V. E. (1988). Psychological type and the 
second year of college achievement: Survival and the gravi- 
tation toward appropriate and manageable major fields. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 14, 57—59. 

Schurr, K. T., Ruble, V. E., &amp; Ellen, A. S. (1985). Myers-Briggs 
Type Inv entory and demographic characteristics of students 
attending and not attending a college basketball game. Jour - 
nal of Sport Behavior, 8, +, 181-194. 

Schurr, K. T., Ruble, V. E., &amp; Henriksen, L. W. (1988). Relation- 
ships of Myers-Briggs Type Indicator personality characteris- 
tics and self-reported academic prohlems and skill ratings 
with scholastic aptitude test scores. Educational and Psycho- 
logical Measurement, 48, 187—196. 

Schurr, K. T., Ruble, V. E., &amp; Henriksen, L. W. (1989). Effects of 
different university admission practices on the MBTI and 
gender composition of a student hody, gradnation rate, and 


enrollment in different departments. Journal of Psychologi- 
cal Type, 18, 24-32. 

Schurr, K. T., Ruble, V. E., Palomba, C., Pickerill, B., &amp; Moore, D. 
(1997). Relationships between the MBTI and selected 
aspects of Tintos model for college attrition. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 40, 31-42. 

Schurr, K. T., Wittig, A. E, Ruble, V. E., &amp; Ellen, A. S. (1988). 
Demographic and personality. characteristics associated 
with persistent, occasional, and non-attendance of univer- 
sity male basketball games by college students. Journal of 
Sport Behavior, 11, 1, 3-17. 

Schutz, W. (1978). FIRO Awareness Scales manual. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Scott, T. H., &amp; Scott, J. C. (1996). Psychological types of outstand- 
ing high school basketball officials. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 39, 40—42. 

Seiden, H. M. (1970). Time perspective and styles of conscious- 
ness (Doctoral dissertation, New School [for Social 
Research). Dissertation Abstracts International, 31, 386B 
(University Microfilms No. 70-11, 275) 

Severino, C. J. (1989). Helping nontraditional students achieve 
college literacy: A context-based study of the uses of text 
and teacher-student interaction (Doctoral dissertation, Uni- 
versity of Illinois at Chicago). Dissertation Abstracts Interna- 
tional, 50/06-A, 1585. 

Shelton, J. (1996). Health, stress, and coping. In A. L. Hammer 
(Ed.), MBTI applications: A decade of research on the Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 197-215). Palo Alto, CA: Con- 
sulting Psychologists Press. 

Sherman, R. G. (1981). Typology and problems in intimate rela- 
tionships. Research in Psychological Type, 4, 4-23. 

Shiflett, S. C. (1989). Validity evidence for the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator as a measure of hemispheric dominance. Educa- 
tional and Psychological Measurement, 49, 3, 741-745. 

Short, G. J., &amp; Grasha, A. E (1995). The relationship of MBTI 
dimensions to perceptions of stress and coping strategies in 
mangers. Journal of Psychological Type, 32, 13-22. 

Shuck, J., &amp; Manfrin, C. (1997). Client verification of reported 
type at onset and after six months of continuous treatment 
in an abstinence-based chemical dependency treatment 
program. Unpublished research. 

Sim, H.-S., &amp; Kim, J.T. (1993). The development and validation 
of the Korean version of the MBTI. Journal of Psychological 
Type, 26, 18-27. 

Simmons, G., &amp; Barrineau, P. (1994). Learning style and the 
Native American. Journal of Psychological Type, 28, 3-10. 

Singer, M. (1989). Cognitive style and reading comprehension. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 17, 31-35. 

Sipps, G. J., Alexander, R. A., &amp; Friedt, L. (1985). Item analysis of 
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Educational and Psychologi- 
cal Measurement, 45, 789-796. 

Smith, A., lrey, R., &amp; McCaulley, M. H (1973). Self-paced instruc- 
tion and college students personality. Enginecring Educa- 
tion, 63 (6), 435—440. 

Smith, N. P (1976). The influence of structural information char- 
acteristics of Jungian personality type on ume horizons in 
decision-making (Doctoral dissertation, University of Cali- 
fornia), Dissertation Abstracts International, 37, 2297A- 
2298A. (University Microfilms No. 76-22, 715) 

Spielberger, C. D. (1983). Manual for the State- Trait Anxicty Inven- 
tory (Form Y). Redwood City, CA: Mind Garden. 

Spokane, A. R. (1996). Holland's theory. In D. Brown &amp; L. Brooks 
(Eds.), Career choice and development (3rd ed.). San Fran- 
cisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Squyres, E. M. (1980). Time orientation and Jungs concept of psv- 
chological wholeness. Unpublished masters thesis, Georgia 
State University. 


408 . MBTI Manual 


Steele, G. E. (1986). An investigation of the relationship between 
students’ interests and the curricular practices of an alterna- 
tive high school, through the perspective of Jungs theory of 
psychological types (Doctoral dissertation, Ohio State Uni- 
versity). Dissertation Abstracts International, +7/10-A, 3616. 

St. Germain, C. J. (1988). À comparative analysis of Jungian psy- 
chological type using measures of academic achievement, 
ability, grades and perceptions of classroom practice tasks of 
middle school students (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Texas at Austin). Dissertation Abstracts International, 48/10- 
nouos 

Stenberg, G. (1990). Brain and personality: Extraversion/Introver- 
sion in relation to EEG, evoked potentials and cerebral blood 
flow. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Lund, 
Sweden. 

Stephens, W. B. (1975, April). University art department and acade- 
mies of art: Ehe relation of artists’ psychological ty pes to their 
spccialties and interests. Paper presented at the National Art 
Education Association Conference, Miami, FL. 

Sue, D. W. (Ed). (1998). Multicultural counseling competencies: 
Individual and organizational development. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage. 

Sundstrom, E., &amp; Busby, P. L. (1997). Co-workers’ perceptions of 
eight MBTI leader types: Comparative analysis of managers 
SYMLOG profiles. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. Kirby (Eds.), 
Developing leaders: Research and applications in psychological 
type and leadership development (pp. 225-265). Palo Alto, 
CA: Davies-Black. 

Super, D. E. (1970). The Work Values Inventory. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Super, D. E., Savickas, M. L., &amp; Super, C. M. (1996). The life-span, 
life-space approach to careers. In D. Brown &amp; L. Brooks 
(Eds.), Career choice and development (3rd ed.). San Fran- 
cisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Swanson, J. L., &amp; O'Saben, C. L. (1993). Differences in supervi- 
sory needs and expectations bv trainee experience, cogni- 
tive style, and program membership. Journal of Counscling 
&amp; Development, 71, 457—464. 

Taggart, W. M., Kroeck, K. G., &amp; Escoffier, M. R. (1991). Validity 
evidence for the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator as a measure of 
hemisphere dominance: Another view. Educational and Psy- 
chological Measurement, 51, 775-783. 

Taylor, E L. (1990). The influence of an outdoor adventure recre- 
ation class on personality type, locus-of-control, self-esteem, 
and selected issues of identitv development of college stu- 
dents (Doctoral dissertation, University of San Francisco). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 51/04-A, 1122. 

Terrill, J. L. (1970). Correlates of counselor role perception (Doe- 
toral dissertation, University of Colorado). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 31, 166A. (University Microfilms 
No. 70-5898) 

Tharp, G. D. (1992). Relationship between personality type and 
achievement in an undergraduate physiology course. Amer- 
ican Journal of Physiology, 262, 6, 1-3. 

Thomas, L. (1996a). The worh style inventory (unpublished items). 
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Thomas, L. (1996b). The worh style inventory. Unpublished mas- 
ters thesis, Virginia Polytechnic and State University. 
Thomas, L., &amp; Harvey, R. J. (1995, May). Improving the measure- 
ment precision of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. Paper pre- 
sented at the annual conference of the Society for Industrial 

Organizational Psychology, Orlando, FL. 

Thomason, R. S. (1983). Relationships of chronological age, psy- 
chological type, and reading comprehension of college stu- 
dents (Doctoral dissertation, University of Florida). Disser- 
tation Abstracts International, 45/04-A, 1086. 


Thompson, B., &amp; Borrello, G. M. (1986). Construct validity of the 
Mycrs-Briggs Type Indicator. Educational and Psychological 
Measurcment, 46, 745-752. 

Thompson, B., &amp; Borrello, G. M. (1989, January). A confirmatory 
factor analysis of data from the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Southwest 
Educational Research Association, Houston, TX. 

Thorne, A. (1987). The press of personality: A study of conversa- 
tions between Introverts and Extraverts. Journal of Personal- 
ity and Social Psychology, 53 (4), 718-726. 

Ihorne, A., &amp; Gough, H. (1991). Portraits of type: An MBTI 
research compendium. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psycholo- 
gists Press. 

Tieger, P. D., &amp; Barron-Tieger, B. (1992). Do what you are. Boston: 
Little, Brown 

Tischler, L. (1994). The MBTI factor structure. Journal of Psycho- 
logical Type, 31, 24-31. 

Tischler, L. (1996). Comparing person-organization personality fit 
to work success. Journal of Psychological Type, 38, 34—43. 

Tobacyk, J. J., Hearn, R. E., &amp; Wells, D. H. (1990). Jungian type 
and California Achievement Test performance in junior 
high school students at high risk for dropout. Journal of 
Psychological Type, 19, 13-20. 

Tobacyk, J. J., Wells, D. H., &amp; Springer, T. P (1988). Jungian type 
and self-concept in junior high school students at high risk 
for dropout. Journal of Psychological Type, 16, 47-53. 

Tzeng, O. C. S., Outcalt, D., Boyer, S. L., Ware, R., &amp; Landis, D. 
(1984). Item validity of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator: 
journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 255-256. 

Toothaker, L. E. (1991). Multiple comparisons for researchers. New- 
bury Park, CA: Sage. 

Vaccaro, A. J. (1988). Personality clash. Personnel Administrator, 
88-92. 

Van Ham, L. B. J. (1994). Psychological variables related to the man- 
agement progress of women employed as registercd nurses in a 
hospital sctting: Implications for carcer counseling and con- 
sulting. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Nebraska, Lincoln. 

Van Rooyen, J. (1994). Creativity: An important managerial 
requirement, a South African perspective. In C. Fitzgerald 
(Ed.), Proceedings of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and 
Leadership: An International Research Conference (pp. 
49-60). College Park, MD: National Leadership Institute. 

Van Sant, S., &amp; Payne, D. (1995). Psychological type in schools: 
Applications for educators. Gainesville, FL: Center for the 
Applications of Psychological Type. 

Van Velsor, E., &amp; Fleenor, J. W. (1997). The MBTI and leadership 
skills: Relationships between the MBTI and four 360-degrec 
management feedback instruments. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. 
K. Kirby (Eds.), Developing leaders: Rescarch and applica- 
tions in psychological type and leadership devclepment (pp. 
139—162). Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Vaughan, J. A., &amp; Knapp, R. H. (1963). A study in pessimism. 
Journal of Social Psychology, 59, 77—92. 

Veach, T. L., &amp; Touhey, J. C. (1971). Personality correlates of accu- 
rate time perception. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 33 (3), 
765-760. 

Vollbrecht, E E. (1991). A study of selected personality character- 
istics of vocational trade and industrial education teachers 
(Doctoral dissertation, Texas A&amp;M University). Disscrtation 
Abstracts International, 52/06-A, 1990. 

Vondran, K. A. (1989). A study of the relationship between per- 
sonality type and the expressive, explanatory, and persua- 
sive writing of seventh and eighth-grade students (Doctoral 
dissertation, Temple Universitv). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 49/10-A, 2920. 





von Franz, M. L. (1971). The inferior function. In M. L. von Franz 
&amp; J. Hillman (Eds), Lectures on Jungs Typology (Sth corrected 
printing) (pp. 1-72). Dallas, TX: Spring Publications. 

Walck, C. L. (1992a). Psychological type and management 
research: A review. Journal of Psychological Type, 24, 13-23. 

Walck, C. L. (1992b). The relationship between Indicator type 
and “true type”: Slight preferences and the verification 
process. Journal of Psychological Type, 23, 17-21. 

Walck, C. L. (1996). Management and leadership. In A. L. Ham- 
mer (Ed.), MBTI applications: A decade of research on the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (pp. 55-80). Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Walck, C. L. (1997). Using the MBTI in management and leader- 
ship: A review of the literature. In C. Fitzgerald &amp; L. K. 
Kirby (Eds.), Developing leaders: Research and applications in 
psychological type and leadership development (pp. 63-114). 
Palo Alto, CA: Davies-Black. 

Waller, N. G., &amp; Reise, S. P. (1989). Computerized adaptive person- 
ality assessment: An illustration with the Absorption Scale. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57 (6), 
1051-1058. 

Walter, K. M. (1984). Writing in three disciplines correlated with 
Jungian cognition styles (Doctoral dissertation, University 
of Texas at Austin). Dissertation Abstracts International, 
46/02-A, 414. 

Walters, N. J., Wilmoth, J. N., &amp; Pitts, C. A. (1988) Personality 
traits of high school HOSA officers. Journal of Health Occu- 
pations Education, 3, 2, 80-105. 

Waltz, E. E., &amp; Gough, H. G. (1984). External evaluation of effi- 
cacy by means of an Adjeetive Check List scale for 
observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 
607-704. 

Ware, R., &amp; Yokomoto, C. (1985). Perceived accuracy of Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator descriptions using Keirsey profiles. 
Journal of Psychological Type, 10, 27-31. 

Watson, D., Clark, L., &amp; Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and 
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: 
The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- 
0gy, 54, 1063-1070. 

Waymire, C. H. (1995). An analysis of first year dropouts from 
two church-related universities as profiled according to the 
Myers-Briggs Typc Indicator (Doctoral dissertation, Univer- 
sity of Mississippi). Dissertation. Abstracts. International, 
55/11-A, 3430. 

Webster, K., &amp; Howard, P J. (1989). MBTI-type heterogeneity and 
business game results. In N. L. Quenk (Ed.), Eighth Biennial 
International Conference of the Association for Psvchological 
Type (pp. 149-152). University of Colorado: Association for 
Psychological Type. 

Wederspahn, A., &amp; Barger, N. J. (1988, Winter). implications for 
using the MBTI with non-native English speakers. Bulletin 
of Psychological Type, 11, 12, 21. 

Weir, D. M. (1976). The relationship of four Jungian personality 
types to stated preference for high unconditional positive 
regard as a counseling approach (Doctoral dissertation, 
Southern Illinois University). Dissertation Abstracts Interna- 
tional, 36, 7881A. (University Microfilms No. 76-13, 298) 

Weisbord, M. (1992). Discovering common ground. San Francisco, 
CA: Berret-Koehler. 

Wellins, R. S., Byham, W. C., &amp; Wilson, J. M. (1991). Empowered 
teams. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 


References 409 


Wheelwright, J. B., Wheelwright, J. H., &amp; Buehler, H. A. (1964). 
Jungian type survey: The Gray-Wheelwright test (16th ed.). 
San Francisco, CA: Society of Jungian Analysts of Northern 
California. 

Whittemore, R. G, &amp; Heimann, R. A (1965). Originality 
responses in academically talented male university fresh- 
men. Psychological Reports, 16, 439—442. 

Williams, B. T. &amp; Carskadon, T. G. (1983). Validity of three MBTI 
clinical interpretive hypotheses in normal and psychosomati- 
cally stressed adults. Research in Psychological Type, 6, 81—86. 

Williams, R. (1992). Personality characteristics of gifted and tal- 
ented students as measured by the Myers-Briggs Type Indi- 
cator and the Murphy-Meisgeicr Type Indicator for Children 
(Doctoral dissertation, East Texas State University). Dissci- 
tation Abstracts International, 53/03-A, 762. 

Williams, R. L., Verble, J. S$., Price, D. E., &amp; Layne, B. H. (1995). 
Relationship between time-management practices and per- 
sonality indices and types. Journal of Psychological Type, 34, 
36-42. 

Wilson, M. A., &amp; Languis, M. L. (1989). Differences in brain elece- 
trical activity patterns between introverted and extraverted 
adults. Journal of Psychological Type, 18, 14-23. 

Wilson, M. A., &amp; Languis, M. L. (1990). A topographic study of 
differences in the P300 between introverts and extraverts. 
Brain Topography, 2, +, 269—274. 

Wilson, M., Laposky, A. D., &amp; Languis, M L. L. (1991, July). A 
topographic study of electrophysiological differences between 
Sensing and Intuitive types. Paper presented at 10th meeting 
of the Association for Psychological Type, Richmond, VA. 

Wittig, A. E, Schurr, K. T., &amp; Ruble, V. E. (1986). Gender, person- 
ality characteristics and academic preparation as factors 
accounting for achievement and attrition of honors stu- 
dents. Forum for Honors, 17, 1, 26—35. 

Wittig, A. E, Schurr, K. T., Ruble, V. E., &amp; Ellen, A. (1994). Rela- 
tionship of Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Thinking-Feeling 
preferences with physical activity choices. Journal of Psy- 
chological Type, 28, 21-28. 

Witzig, J. $. (1978). Jungs typology and classification of psy- 
chotherapies. Journal of Analytical Psychology, 11 Biennial 
International Conference, Boston, MÀ. 

Woodruff, R. G. V, &amp; Clarke, E M. (1993). Understanding the 
academic needs of minority students at the University of 
Hawaii, Manoa. Psychological Type and Culture—East and 
West: A Multicultural Symposium, 199-205. 

Yang, A. I. (1981). Psychological temporality: A study of temporal 
orientation, attitude, mood states, and personality type 
(Doctoral dissertation, University of Hawaii). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 42 (4), 1677B. 

Yao, Y. (1993). Analyses of the MBTI personality types of Chinese 
female school administrators in Liaoning province, the Peo- 
ples Republic of China (Doctoral dissertation, Mississippi 
State University). Dissertation Abstracts International, 55, 32. 

Yeakley, E R. (1982). Communication style preferences and adjust- 
ments as an approach to studying effects of similarity in psy- 
chological type. Research in Psychological Type, 5, 30-48. 

Yeakley, E. R. (1983). Implications of communication. style 
research for psychological type theory. Research in Psycho- 
logical Type, 6, 2-13. 

Zietsmann, G. (1996). The validation of the MBTI on a South 
African sample: A summary of the results. Paper presented at 
International Type Users Conference, South Africa. 


A â (^al " a ae‘ 
Bos us p" Su i P 18 i 
To A B 
Mesum aas 9 E ur S716 
un "n B ew. «Jw 
159 a “(Sq n Fiaa 
i zd E 1 - À at 20 nest 
ite (eae elena 
Saj © 
EI 
o Buh j 59 = sa B ô E 7 
&gt; on fu He 4.625 dit b cl 
EIE C ——. T 7) gnie 
i . i ' 
m PE ace | ow ~*~ -— À n 
g - nu ls — —À G «-— 
ot wt &amp;@ S k m lé 
Em |: we F unc» 4 €.,u-—*3 
4€ p» ugue seh vas i 
LN (| are Wile 4 Lo Im 
noe. uw nu. 1; Sedi ? w aes. Tm c mii 
"e^ S sprint ttt. pru oar 


9^! 419. s» bw "Wee 


, mv rw. m. 85 ae” Le 
titi (0 Reels. Tapestis eA PO, uit 
ub. CS Pun «9 wie IND 
D^ Mir Tw uet we &gt; ame 9 und 
sa, 0 AU» 1 è Aj 
FEAP dede A 5... hb 
mss 6 Ih Mesi fee E i E 
E ia @ 41 m am 
Qa." 9€, "n" Weft i » 
net E I E @ Us dn oe L as i 
p Ont a sa vg. A i Cu pe d 
e g &amp; cd $ s $49 
4 gum: ! ne g ' P v! 
ue P 1^ eA “As Qv. ba "i 
e m o - od Ag * ~ = í wii? 
ew aa pi pg ww. " 
| Mme &gt;= ee / ' 
"A | al s pu z 2 D G s 5-3 Il 
c ap e © ums. m A 
EE A LÁ afte impe 
m» n p k ] 
ew — 144 i wx 
E rå v^ &gt; ' ® 
b p 4 a «€ aq 
Per o |. 
i 7 r 
i - (v «i 
Ne 2 
ve e ' | 
E E lw ii e 
ac 
mE S sy i werg "a d) a) 
j é ' í 
m » os Pp eq 
&lt; 


Ar | Pe) TW ae 

















































| hs Depart que Aur )/ 1 
fied? &amp; ad 
pd cL 07; 21-4. VU ef ial 
eo Qum bE Ge beue o desi Rei eap 
£4 4 | bins dám en 
E IE —— mt any 
Te a Lt Ca e t “ar ae 
re FAA 115 aed pies 
46 $4597 «qub cies s 
Aj finc Áo wo e» eG ong qi 
e. ü bid hon ` = nem 
- vo Watt ostu ln 
d anl no cubo ue iii i LORI 
as! $ WU, dPiap aan" uz 


j av ELA Raapa Uer. nm 
wriat 144 iy edat A 


éd * « 


X z 2 


m 


m f $ 2 DEP 
ue UMP. BW 42 &gt;. =e &gt; diy 
A th ay A Bí, ap 
nh @ cM va ^. d Mic 
KIT = e @&amp; = 
iii a Amii sch Mngt api 
e Me! a delta) hà Eo T cal ax 
Aie ge a TT 
E De | p 9 Uy 
tibi d NP48 6 1 3-45 v 
es «= $. 44171 Aid di 

- eiie: 
ù "Pac oer at 
«4 c a» edd a tug 
ishi n2 ca 


E engem 


- 


qe 


oy dde e E 991 * cw s 
LEAL 
9 m í ^ 25 LIA 


im Dmm c£. c2 A ee tell ien 

&gt; 0° abet f 
TETEA T a © oy 

à -— À 

"^ died t "i 

vw 6 - bio cow tuf pee, 

l Sy moi S E 


$ i 4 diia ste «Le ot 


















T D», A &lt;a pi br asia. pet 
pond Tni; s y Bh (mi.0 
le ot Woe! "M 

id $5 waar a depo? ets 

s 9 ohio T, 

| howd iani Said, Ifi 
TUC ng d lide tear. in ag oce. 
^ huous 
9 o9. Qui qat TM o d a uf as OMA 
Hee) A Os het e 
mite jel a Css ar tT ie: 22 
ne 7 £4 ete. dy 
odii tA ust anh T 
ls iy egy! afe, 


y 


dation S o 


E eo4 bona? i 
w ery 
Daaa 0h 
(a. 
HR 
g 7 B 
i o f ! 
E i 
s B 


Nancy J. Barger, M.A., works as an independent consultant 
in Littleton, Colorado, focusing on organizational transition, 
leadership and management development, and team build- 
ing. She has led training programs and consulted with orga- 
nizations in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, 
Finland, Singapore, New Zealand, and Australia. Her publi- 
cations include MBTI Type and Change: Leaders Resource 
Guide and Participants Guide (1997), “Multicultural Applica- 
tions” in MBTI Applications: A Decade of Research on the 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (1996), The Challenge of Change 
in Organizations: Helping Employees Thrive in the New Fron- 
ticr (1995), and The Interaction of Culture and Type: INTP and 
ESF] Women, INFP and EST] Men Across Cultures (1996), all 
coauthored with Linda K. Kirby, and WORK Types (with J. 
Kummerow and L. K. Kirby, 1997). 


John K. DiTiberio, Ph.D., is associate professor and chair in 
the Department of Counseling and Family Therapy at St. 
Louis University. He has taught high school history and 
courses for undergraduates in education, and he currently 
teaches courses for masters and doctoral students in coun- 
seling and family therapy. Diliberio setves on the faculty of 
the Association lor Psychological Types MBII qualifving 
program and on the MBTI Research Advisory Board lor 
Consulting Psychologists Press. He is author of “Education, 
Learning Styles, and Cognitive Styles" in MBTI Applications: 
A Decade of Research on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(1996) and coauthor of Writing and Personality (1995), 
Introduction to Type in College (1993), and Personality and 
the Teaching of Composition (1989). 


Allen L. Hammer, Ph.D., is senior scientist at Consulting 
Psychologists Press. His own research on the MBTI focuses 
on careers, couples, stress and coping, and media prefer- 
ences. He is author of Introduction to Type and Careers 
(1993), the MBTI Team Report (1994), the MBTI Relationship 
Report (1987), and the Strong Professional Report (1994), and 
coauthor of the MBTI Career Report (1992), Introduction to 


Contributors 


Type in College (1993), the Strong and MBTI Career Develop- 
ment Guide (1996), the Strong Interpretive Report (1994), and 
Introduction to the FIRO-B in Organizations (1993). He is edi- 
tor of MBTI Applications: A Decade of Research on the Myers- 
Briggs Type Indicator (1996). He also serves on the editorial 
board of the Journal of Psychological Type. 


Linda K. Kirby, Ph.D., is director of the Association for Psy- 
chological Types MBTI qualifying program. She works as a 
writer, editor, researcher, and trainer in Littleton, Colorado. 
With Katharine D. Myers, she edited Introduction to Type (6th 
ed., 1998) and authored Introduction to Type Dynamics and 
Development (1994). With Nancy J. Barger, she wrote MBTI 
lypc and Change: Leaders Resource Guide and Participants 
Guide (1997), "Multicultural Applications” in MBTI Applica- 
tions: A Decade of Research on the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 
(1996), The Challenge of Change in Organizations: Helping 
Employces Thrive in the New Frontier (1995), and The Interac- 
tion of Culture and Type: INTP and ESF] Women, INFP and 
EST] Men Across Cultures (1996). She is also coauthor of 
WORK Types (with J. Kummerow and N. J. Barger, 1997). 


Jean M. Kummerow, Ph.D., is a psychologist, consultant, 
and author in St. Paul, Minnesota. She applies type in eareer 
counseling, leadership and management development, and 
team building. Kummerow trains professionals internation- 
ally in the use of several psychological instruments including 
the MBTI, the MBTI Step H, and the Strong Interest Inventory. 
She is coauthor of Introduction to Type in Organizations (3rd 
ed, 1998), the MBTI Step ll Expanded Interpretive Report 
(1996), the Strong and MBTI Career Development Guide and 
Workbook (1996), "Using the MBTI Step LH with Leaders and 
Managers" in Developing Leaders: Rescaich and Applications in 
Psychological Type and Leadership Development (1997), LIFE- 
Types (with S. K. Hirsh, 1989), and WORKTypes (with N. J. 
Barger and L. K. Kirby, 1997), and editor of New Directions in 
Career Planning and the Workplace (1991). She also serves on 
the editorial board of the Journal of Psychological Type. 


4i 


412 MBTI Manual 


Roger R. Pearman, Ed.D., is president of Leadership Perlor- 
mance Systems, Inc., a training and consulting firm provid- 
ing management and business development services in 
Pfafftown, North Carolina. Through this company, he works 
with organizations in the United States, Canada, and Europe. 
Winner of thc 1995 Isabel Briggs Myers Research Award, he 
is a member of the MBTI Research Advisory Board and a past 
president of thc Association for Psychological Tvpe. Pearman 
is coauthor of I'm Not Crazy, Pm Just Not You: The Real Mean- 
ing of the Sixteen Personality Types (with Sarah Albritton, 
1997); author of Hardwired Leadership (1998), and Enhane- 
ing Leadership Development Through Psychological Type 
(1998); and editor of The Best of the Bulletin: Nineteen Years of 
Psychological Type (1998). 


Naomi L. Quenk, Ph.D., is a licensed clinical psychologist 
in independent practice in Albuquerque, New Mexico. She 
is past president of the Association for Psychological Type 
and former Director of Training for the MBTI qualifying 
program. She has written numerous articles on psychologi- 
cal type and is author of Beside Ourselves: Our Hidden Per- 
sonality in Everyday Life (1993) and In The Grip: Our Hid- 
den Personality (1996). Quenk is coauthor of the MBTI Step 
II Expanded Interpretive Report (1996), Dream Thinking: The 
Logie, Magie, and Meaning of Your Dreams (1995) and True 
Loves: Finding the Soul in Love Relationships (1997). 


absolute frequencies, defined, 296 
achievement, academic, type and measures of, 
268-270, 273, 274 
Adams, A. B., 255 
Adjective Check List (ACL), 179, 191-194, 232 
Adler, N. J., 377 
administration guidelines, 103, 105 
for populations, 106 
age differences, 32, 109, 387n. 9 
forms, 106-107 
respondent cooperation, 107-109 
for scoring, 109. 110-113 
for settings 
career counseling, 322-324 
counseling and psychotherapy, 249-250 
multicultural environments, 375 
organizations, 339-362 
schools and training, 280—283 
adolescents, 240 
administration of MBTI to, 109, 129-130 
type development in, 27-28, 120 
See also age groups, children 
adults, 109 
type development in, 27-28, 240 
See also age groups 
advancement, job, 108 
Africa, and culture of South Africa, 369—370, 
37] 
African American respondents, 156, 161-162 
See also ethnic groups 
age groups, 5, 106 
differences 
in administration, 32, 387n. 9 
and DIF analysis of items, 152-155 
and item selection for Form M, 16, 
142-143 
in multicultural use of MBTI, 372, 379-381 
type approach to counseling with, 239-240 
See also adolescents; adults; children 
agreement negotiation, 348-349 
and confliet resolution in organizations, 
335-330 
Albert, M., 287 
Albritton, S. C., 334 
Alcorn, B. K., 270, 277 
Alexander, R. A., 172-173 
American Indian respondents, 161-162, 370 
See also ethnic groups 
American Psychological Association, 370 
Americans with Disabilities Act, 108 
Amis-Reichle, B., 265 
Anchors, S., 255, 25B, 268, 278 
Anderson, S. J., 369 
ANOVA and type dynamics, 204, 205-210 


answer sheet, 109, 112, 1 32, 133 
See also responses 
Apostal, R., 263-264 
applications, 
background of, 3-5, 8, 10 
in career counseling, 285-324 
in counseling and psychotherapy, 223—251 
in eross-cultural settings, 28-29, 388n. 1 
in education, 253-284 
in multicultural settings, 367-384 
in organizations, 108, 325-365 
Applied Cross-Cultural Psychology (Brislin), 370 
aptitude, academic, types and measures of, 
266-267, 271, 272 
Arain, A. A., 248 
Arthur, M B., 286 
Artisan (SP temperament) characteristics, 59, 
60-61 
Asian respondents, 161-102 
See also ethnie groups 
Association for Psychological Type Conference 
Proccedings, 295 
Auman, K. S., 261, 263-264 
attitudes, defined, 3-4, 6, 22, 25-27, 387n. 1 
Australia, 369 
auxiliary function, 387n. 3 
counselors assessment of, 230-231 
defined, 22, 29,119, 123 
difference between dominant and, 27-28, 
203-210 


in dynamic interaction of preferences, 29-33, 


387nn. 7,8 


Babcock, R. B., 243 

Bail HT 27&gt; 

Barger, N. J., 53-54, 58, 106, 281, 292, 327, 330, 
334—335, 338, 342—344, 346, 350, 352, 
2551503072369 371—373 375-375 

Barr L., 358 

Barr, N., 358 

Barrett 1 2598 7063 

Barrett-Lennard Relationship Inventory, 248 

Barrineau, P, 258, 278, 369 

Barron-Tieger, B., 292 

Barth, R. L., 266 

Bates, M., 40, 48, 50 

Bates, N. W.. 369 

Bathurst, J., 574 

Battle, P. C., 375 

Baxter, W. D., 255-256, 258 

Bayne, R., 2 ale 73 

Beck, E S., 247 

hehavior, 171 
disorders, 276 


Index 


behavior continucd 
and validity in differences of types, 189—191, 
192-193 
behavioral level of type interpretation, 322 
Beidler, P G., 256, 258, 261, 283 
Bem Sex Role Inventory, 249 
Berens, L. V, 59, 388n. 1 
Berman, J. J., 248-249 
Beside Ourselves (N. L. Quenk), 346 
best-fit type, 
defined, 107-108 
interpretation of, 116-118 
studies of, 16-17, 144-145 
Betz, N. E., 1731 310 
Beyler, J., 263-264 
bias of raters, 191, 280, 330 
Sce also errors 
Black respondents. Sce African American 
respondents 
Block, J., 191 
Borgen, EH. 1/8, 510 
Borham, B., 369 
Borrello, G. M., 172-173 
Boyd, N. E., 265, 278 
Boyer, S. L., 172 
brain activity patterns, 188-190 
brainstorming, 24 
Braun J. A., 247 
Brazıl, 369 
Brehm, S., 358 
Bridges, W , 286, 341—345, 358-359 
Bripgc ho 3595 93 ley? 6.20) 3321 25. 
140, 330, 367-368, 387nn. 1, 2,6 
Brislin, R., 370, 376-377, 388n. 2 
Brock, S. A., 118, 330, 334 
Brooker, N., 263 
Brooks, E R., 189-191 
Brown, D., 312 
Brown, S. D., 308 
Brush, L. C., 255, 258, 278 
Buehler, H A., 184, 387nn. 3, 8 
burnout, job, 237-239 
Burt, R. B., 194 
Busby, P. L., 353 
Byhain, W. C., 348 


California Psychological Inventory (CPD), 67 
and leadership, 353, 354-355 
and validity, 175, 177, 216-217 

California Q-Sort, 191—194, 232, 233 

Call, M. E., 360 

Campbell, B. R., 243 

Campbell, D. P, 218 

career, defined, 286 


413 


414 — MBTI Manual 


carecr counseling, 317 
type use in, 285, 286 
administering MBTI in, 322-324 
lor decision making, 316 
environments, work, 286-293 
and interests, 307—312 
interpreting MBTI in, 322—324 
and job satisfaction, 303-307 
levels in, 317-322 
lor occupational selection, 293—302 
and values, 312-315 
Sec also counschng 
Career Development Inventory, 316 
Career Factors Inventory, 174, 181 
Career Occupational Preference System (COPS), 
307 
Career Report Manual (Hammer &amp; Macdaid), 
295, 303 
Carey, J. C2 78 
Carlson, R., 194, 201, 279, 367 
Carlyn, M., 203 
Carm 540 
Camell P E. 275 
Carskadon. T. G , 14, 119, 123, 157, 163, 189, 
197-198, 203, 224, 248 
Carson, B. H., 256, 258, 261, 283 
Canech À., 2G 
Carver, C. S. 8200 
Casas, E., 247, 369, 371, 373-373 
Casey, L., 268 
Cadtoe C. ME 203 
Cauvin, P. 377-378 
Center for Applications of Psychological Type 
( CAPT), 132, 219, 378-379 
Center for Creative Leadership, 216 
Challenge of Change in Organizations, The (Barger 
&amp; Kirby), 343, 346 
change, 225, 286 
management ol, in organizations, 341—344 
Character of Organizations, The (Bridges), 
350 
Chartrand, J. M., 174, 286 
chenucal dependency, 45, 246 
See also stress 
Chemie, Caor 
Chesborough, S. R., 256, 278 
Chiang, G. C., 276 
children, 
administration ol MBTI to, 109, [30 
type approach in counseling of, 239-240 
type development in. 27-28 
type indicator for, 10, 106, 254, 276, 
280, 372 
Sec also adolescents; age groups, 
China, 58, 369 
Civil Rights Act, 108 
Clancy, S&amp;G., 339, 344 
Clark op 270 
Clark, L., 239 
Clark, T. 38/18 / 
Clarke, E M., 255, 268 
classical test theory (CTT), 134, 135, 136, 
164.165 
CMT (Concept Mastery Test), 268 
Coan, R W., 247-248 
coefficient alpha reliability, 161 
See also reliability 
Cohen, J . 174 
colleges, type use in, 277-279, 280 
communication, 
improvement in, 332-335, 536 
dunng organizational changes, 342-343 
styles, 233-234, 351 
Sve also characteristics of specific types 
Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills, 266 
Comrey, A L., 172-173 
Concept Mastery Test (CMT), 268 
de 108, 110,113, 195-196 
conllict resolution in organizations, 335-339 
and agreement negotiation, 348—349 
conscious energy, 23-26 
Sec also lunctions 


construct validity, 36, 37, 174, 210 
See also validity 
construction of MBTI. See under Form M 
Consulting Psychology Journal, 352 
continuous scores correlations, 
in Form M, 147, 149 
and reliability, 162-163 
and validity, 173-184 
See also reliability 
Cook, D. D.. 197 
Cooper, S. E., 265 
Coping Resources Inventory (CRD, U84, 236-238, 
346-347 
COPS (Career Occupational Preference System), 
307 
Corle AETS a a shee Sono Lo 
Cormettae m, 200 
Cortner, R. H., 243 
Coscarelli, W. C., 261, 263 
Costa, P 1. jie 203 
counseling, 
type Use qo 2 a1 5, 2295274 
administration of MBTI lor, 249-251 
advantages of, 224—225 
with age groups, 239-240 
clinical research on, 246—249 
with couples, 240-245 
with families, 245-246 
on health, stress, and coping, 235—239 
interpretation of MBTI for, 249-25] 
process ol, 225-234 
See also career counseling 
CPI. See California Psychological Inventory (CPU 
CPP Software System, 110, 112 
Craig} C. Hg 26 
Craig, D. L.. 326 
Creative Aging (Millner), 322 
creativity, 191, 194, 387n. 4 
Cropley, A. J., 194 
cross-cultural application, 28-29, 388n. | 
Crutchfield, R. S.. 191 
CTT. Sce classical test theory (CTT) 
cultural dillerences, 106, 142 
and cross-cultural application, 28-29, 222, 
388n. | 
in educational setting, 279—280 
m organizational setting, 337-338 
See also ethnic groups; multicultural settings 
culture, 
collectivist, 369-370 
defined, 14, 368 
pressures Írom, 32-33, 122 
Cultures Consequences (Holstede), 376-377 
Cultures and Organizations (Hofstede), 377 
Cushner, K., 377 


Dana, R . 255, 258, 278, 370 
Dancing the Wheel of Psychological Types 
(Loomis), 370 
Daresh, D. M., 184 
Daugherty, P. W., 278-279 
Dawis, R. V, 303, 305 
Dawson, B. G., 266 
De Beer, J., 369-371, 373, 375-376, 378 
decision making, 
in career Counseling, 316 
in organizational settings, 339—341, 349 
Sce also characteristics of specific types 
Delbridge-Parker, L., 276 
Demarest, L.. 242 
Denison, D. R.. 325 
Denny, D., 278 
DeVellis, R. E, 106 
Developing Child. The (Murphy), 283 
Developing Leaders, 219, 344, 358 
devclopment, 
of leadership, 352-358 
of MBTI, 3—4, 11-17 
of type, 27-29, 119-120, 229-232, 387n. 10 
See also Form M, construction 
developmental level of type interpretation, 
318-322 


dichotomies, 4, 6-7, 11, 117 
counscling issnes related to, 226-229, 
241-242 
and reliability ol MBTI, [63-164 
type use in stress management, 344—345 
and validity of MBTI, 126, 184-189, 190 
See also specific dichotomies by letters 
Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 293 
Dietz, T. J., 249 
differential item functioning (DIF), 12, 16 
in Form M, 142, 152-155 
See also item response theory (IRT) 
differentiated function, defined, 27, 28 
Dillard, N., 270, 277 
DiMarco, R., 288 
discrimination, degree of, 16 
DiTiberio, J. K., 39, 118, 247, 261, 265, 
275-276, 278-279, 283, 326, 375 
diversity training, 338 
division point. See midpoint of scales 
Do What You Arc (Tieger &amp; Barron-Tieger), 
292 
dominant function, 387n. 3 
counselors assessment of, 229—230 
defined, 22-23, 29, 119, 123 
dillerence between auxiliary and, 27-28, 
203-210 
in dynamic intcraction of preferences, 29-33, 
387nn. 7,8 
Donovan, A. J., 265 
Drasgow, E, 134, 152 
Drummond, R. J., 263-264 
Dunning, D. G., 255 
dynamic level of type interpretation, 317-318 
dynamics of type, 203 
counseling issues related to, 229-232, 243 
in leadership development, 356-358 
in organizational setting, 330-332, 346 
validity research on, 198-217 


EAP (expected a posteriori) estimate, 146—147 
EAR (Expanded Analysis Report). Sec Step ll 
scoring method 
Edmunds, M . 195 
education, 
type use in, 253—254 
administration of MBTI in, 280-283 
and aptitude and achievcment, 266-270 
cultural differences in, 279-280 
in elementary and secondary settings, 40, 
276-277, 279-280 
in higher education settings, 277-279, 280 
interpretation ol MBTI m, 280-283 
in language areas, 271-276 
and learner characteristics, 40, 261-264 
teacher-learner interactions in, 2605-266 
and working with 16 types, 254-261 
See also learning styles; teachers 
Educational Testing Service, 129, 130, 133, 142 
Edwards, A. L., 218 
Edwards Personality Preference Schedule (EPPS), 
218 
EF type characteristics, 58 
Effective Teaching, Effective Learning (A. M. 
Fairhurst &amp; L. L. Fairhurst), 283 
Eggins, J. A., 264 
Ehrman, M., 258, 263-264. 275, 283 
E-I dichotomy, 
characteristics ol, 6, 26, 261-262 
counseling issues related to, 226-227, 
24)-242 
in education, 278 
in work situations, 286—288, 336 
EJ type characteristics, 47—48, 49 
electronic administration of MBTI, 112-113 
elementary education, tvpe use in, 40, 276-277, 
279-280 
Ellen, Ag $2275: 2:48 
Elliott, G. R., 255, 261, 263-264 
Elliot Oo m 
Emhretson, S5. E., 154 
Emotion Quotient Inventory (EQD, 353, 355 


EN type characteristics, 54, 57, 58 

energy. See conscious energy 

ENF) type, 
characteristics, 64, 100-102, 333 
in education settings, 257, 258 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 

ENFP type, 
characteristics, 64, 79, 81, 82, 333 
in education settings, 255-256, 257 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 

English as a second language (ESL), 372-373 
Sec also multicultural settings 

ENT] type, 
characteristics, 64, 89-9] 92, 93, 333 
iu education settings, 257, 258 
occupatioual trend of, 293-295 
therapeutic issues for, 232 
values of, 312-314, 315 

ENTE type, 
characteristics, 64, 77-79, 80, 333 
in education settings, 255-256, 257 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
therapeutic issues for, 232 
values of, 312-314, 315 

environment, 
for administration of MBTI, 108 
type development as influenced by, 28, 171 
at work, 287-293 

EP type characteristics, +7-48 


EPPS (Edwards Personality Preference Schedule), 


218 
EQ! (Emotion Quotient Inventory), 353, 355 
Erickson, C., 194 
errors, 117, 12] 
bias, 191, 280, 330 
falsification, 108, 109 
guessing, 132, 133 
iu measurement, 109,171, 200 
sample size as influence on, 200, 201 
Prsanic, GuG., 277 
ES type characteristics, 54, 56—57 
Escoffier, M. R., 263 
ESF] type, 
characteristics, 64, 96, 98-100, 333 
in education scttings, 257, 258 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 
Pom type, 
characteristics, 72-74, 333 
in education settings, 255, 257 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
therapeutic issues for, 232 
values of, 312-314, 315 
ESL (English as a sccoud language), 275-276 
See also multicultural settings 
ESiyigpe. 
characteristics, 64, 88-89, 90, 333 
in education settings, 257, 258 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
therapeutic issues for, 232 
values of, 312—314, 315 
Esai pe, 
characteristics, 68, 70-72, 333 
in education settings, 255, 257 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 
ET type characteristics, 58 
ethnic groups, 
and ESL, 372-373 
in national sample, 142, 156-158 
and reliability estimates, 161-162 
See also cultural differences; multicultural 
settings 
Evans, L. N., 195 
Expanded Analysis Report (EAR). See Step ll 
scoring method 
expected a posteriori (EAP) estimate, 146—147 
extracurricular activities and type, 277-278 
Extraversion (E), 
communication style of, 334, 335, 336 


Extraversion (E) continued 
counseling issues related to, 226, 293 
cultural differences im expression of, 222, 
370-371 
description of, 22, 25-26, 174-175 
and type table format, 36, 37 
work stressors for, 342, 345 
See also types (16); type theory 


factor analysis of prelerence scales, 172-173 
Fairhurst, A. M., 279-280, 283 
Fairhurst, L. L., 279-280, 283 
fantasy and imagery, 195 
Faucett, J. M., 263 
Feeling (F), 
communication style of, 334, 335, 336 
counscling issues related to, 227, 293 
description of, 24-25, 179, 340 
and type table format, 36, 57 
work stressors for, 342, 343, 345 
Sce also types (16); type theory 
Ferdman, R. L , 275, 283 
FIRO-B. See Fundamental Interpersonal Relations 
Orientation-Behavior 
hrst lunction. Sec dominant functiou 
Fisher, N. M., 275 
Fitzgerald, C., 219, 322, 326, 339-340, 352, 
356-358, 376, 380 
FJ type characteristics, 54 
Fleenor, J. W.. 191, 216, 352-353, 358 
foreign language lcarmug, and type preferences, 
275-276 
Form A12, 13, 12859129155 
Form AV (Abbreviated Version), 130-131 
Form B, 12, 128, 129 
Form C, 12, 128-129, 131, 132, 133 
Form D, 129-130 
Fomu E L2. 13090215] 
EOrm:E 
development of, 10, 130, 132, 137 
item format in, 12, 14, 141, 142 
uc-breaking formula in, 12-13, 130, 133 
validity, 172, 187, 211 
correlatious with other scales, 191, 194, 
213-216 
Form G, 109 
comparisou to Form M, 4, 106 
DIF analysis, 152-155 
items, 141-142, 150-151, 153 
omissions, 151 
re hability, 160-169 
results, 151, 152, 156-157 
scales, 151-152, 154 


development of, 10, 128, 130-131. 132, 137, 


388n. | 
educational use of, 254—258 
items of, 12, 14, 122 
multicultural use of, 372—373, 374 
scoring system for, 110, 148, 149 
self-scorable version, 106, 109 
development of, 130—131, 132 
validity, 172 
and validity, 172, 198 
continuous scores, 173-184, 185, 195 
correlations with other scales, 175-178, 
185, 213-215 
Form J, 109, 172, 374 
in best-fit type study, 144-145 
development of, 4, 10, 12, 107, 128, 131 
items 
number of, 12, 15, 107, 139 
selectiou of, lor Form M, 139, 140-141 
Form K, 109, 172 
development of, 4, 10, 107, 121 
Form M, 
administratiou guidelines, 103, 105 
appropnate lorm use, 106-107 
populations, 106, 109 
respondent cooperation, 107—109 
scoring, 110-113 
comparison to Form G 
DIF analysis, 152-155 


Index 415 





Form M continued 
items, 150-151, 153 
omissions, 151 
reliability, 126, 160-169 
results, 151, 152, 156-158 
scales, 131—152. 153 
coustruction, 11, 13-17, 122, 127 
history of previous forms, 125. 128-133 
and IRT, 134-139 
item selection, 139-143 
and midpoint of scales, 132-133, 
141-132, 149-150 
samples, 156—158 
scoring procedures, 143-149 
educational use of, 258—260 
properties of, 150—156 
reliability of, 126, 159-160 
internal cousistency, 160-162 
measurement precision, 164—169 
test-retest, 162—164 
results from, 147—149, 151 
scoriug, 13 
IRT, 12, 16-17, 136-139, 146-149, 369 
and item weights, 12, 16, 110, 146 
self-scorable version, 106-107, 109, 
110~-1)2, 145-146 
template-scorable version, 109, 110-112, 
145-146 
validity of 
continuous scores, 173-184, 185 
correlations with other scales, 178-184 
correlations with self-estimates, 196-198 
format of items, 
forced-choice responses, 5, 7, 15, 14! 
phrase questions, 12, 123, 141 
word-pair questions, 12, 123, 129, 141, 
388u. 1 
forms, selection of, 106—108 
See also specific forms by letter 
Fourqurean, J., 261, 264, 266 
fourth function. See inferior function 
FP type characteristics, 54 
Frederick, A. H., 247 
Freeman, D., 37+, 377-378 
Freeman, S5. C., 316 
Predman. C. P2977 
Friedt, L., 172-173 
Fry, E., 106 
Fry readability formula, 106 
fuuctious, 
defined, 3, +, 6, 23-25 
history of, 22-23, 387n 2 
priorities and direction of, 30-33 
See also names of individual functions 
Fundamental Interpersonal Relations 
Orientation—Behavior (FIRO-B), 113, 143, 
178,218 


Gallagher, S. A., 266 
Galvin, M. D., 247 
Gantz, B. S.. 94 
Gatdenvarn! IP 575 3077312 
Garger, 5., 265 
Gautsch, S. M., 275 
Gehnnger, G. S., 317 
Geller, M H., 224 
gender dilfereuces, 98, 122 
conflicts related to, 337-338 
aud creativity, 70, 71 
and MBTI items 
DIF analysis, 152-155 
selection for Form M, 16, 142-143 
weighting, 12, 14, 110, 132, 133 
in national sample, 156-158 
and reliability estimates, 161-162 
and research on couples aud type, 243-245 
and substance ahuse, 79, 80 
in validity studies, 211-213, 215-216 
Gershman, E. S., 255, 268, 278 
Gifts Differing (1. B. Myers with P B. Myers), 7, 
21-22, 280, 331 
Gilchns® B. J., 277 


416 MBTI Manual 


Gilligan) C., 212 

Ginn, C. W, 246 

Giron, G., 369 

Globetti, E., 278-279 

Godleski, E. S., 266 

Golanty-Koel, R., 266 

goodness of response, defined, 131 

Gordon, V. N., 261, 263 

Gordy, @ O8 71,273 

Gottlredson, G D., 307 

Gough, H. G., 
US EE SI. 

grades, academic, and type preferences, 133, 
268—270, 273, 274 

Graduate Record Exain (GRE), 268 

Granade, J G., 296 

Grandy, T. G., 277 

Grant, W. H., 184, 189-191, 196, 248, 387n. 7 

Grasha, A. E, 347 

Grasha-Reichmann Student Learning Styles 
Ouestionnaire, 255 

Gratias, M., 142 

GRE (Graduate Record Exam), 268 

Grecnberge SES 

gnieving process during transitions, 343 

Griffin, I D., 278 

Grndler, M C., 255-256, 258 

Group Embedded Figures Test, 309 

Grutter J., 312 

Gryskiewicz, N. D., 191 

Gryskiewncz, S. S., 194 

Guardian (5) temperament) characteristics, 
59-60 

gnessing vs. omissions, 109, 132, 155 

Guidelines for Providers of Psychological Services 
to Ethnic, Linguistic and Culturally Diverse 
Populations, 370 

Guild, P B., 265 

Guy, R. F, 266 


Hackett, G , 308 
Hahn-Rolhns, D., 329 
Haley, U. C V, 340 
Hall, W. B., 191 
Halpin, G., 263 
Halpin, W. G., 263 
Hambleton, R. K., 134 
Hamilton, D. L., 278 
Hamleug .. 2w7 


Hammer, A. L., 8, 10, 14, 54, 116, 118, 147, 156, 


17+. 197-198, 210-211, 218, 236, 243-245, 
254, 263, 273, 283, 292—293, 295-296, 299, 
303, 305, 307, 311-312, 316-318, 323, 330, 
348, 350—351, 368, 378—379, 388n. 1 

Hannah, B., 242 

Hansen, J. C., 218 

Hardwired Leadership, 358 

Hardy-Jones, J., 258, 278 

Haring, K., 276 

Harker, J. B.. 359 

Harmon, L. W., 174, 310 

Harris, A. H., 14, 157, 198 

Harrisberger, L., 266 

Harrison? D: F195, 217. 255.258. 283 

Harrison, H. A., 279, 375 

Ham i256 

Harvey, R. J., 
172-173 

Hawkins, C. A., 326 

Hawkins, R. C., li, 326 

Hay, S., 258, 278 

health. 235-239 
and substance abuse, 45, 246 
Sec also characteristics of specific ty pes, stress 

Hearn. R. Pe 279 

Heavrin, A R., 318 

Heilbrun, A. B., 191 

Heimann, R. A., 194 

Held, J. S., 275 

Helson, R., 189, 191 

Hennksen, L. W, 266, 270, 277 

Hermann Brain Dominance Instiument, 263 

Hermon, M V, 334 


It. 154. 136-137, 12, 155, 


189-191, 194, 204, 213, 215-216, 


Hester 273 

bücks E S189 241.24: 

Hill, O. W, 279 

Hinkle, K. S., 261 

Hippocrates, 59 

Hirsh/S-K5 11981195, 293,292. 327. PO 332, 
33+, 340, 344, 396, 350, 358, 365 

Hispanic respondents, 156, 161-162 
See also ethnic groups 

Hockersmith, P. E., 263 

Hoffman, J. L., 258, 332 

Hofstede, G , 368-369, 376—377 

Holland, C. L., 184 

tlolland, J. L., 307, 317 

Holsworth, TE- 2591203 

Hopkins, L. G., 303 

Hopkirk, C., 369-570 

Houlette, E, 275 

Howe, H. E., 248—249 

Howes, R. J., 163 

Howland, A., 194 

Huitt, W. G., 340, 369 

Hulin, C. L., 134 

Human Information Processing Survey, 263 

Huszczo, G E., 348, 350-351 

Hyman, I. A., 256, 265 


ICC. See item characteristic curve ICC) 

Idealist (NF temperament} characteristics, 61, 62 

IF type characteristics, 58 

[J type characteristics, 44-46 

Lm Not Crazy, I'm Just Not You (Pearman &amp; 
Albritton), 334, 338 

imagery and fantasy, 195 

In the Grip (N. L. Quenk), 346 

IN type characteristics, 54, 55-56 

index, defined, 148 

inferior function, 28 
counselors assessment of, 231-232 
defined, 30, 119-120 


in dynamic interaction of preferences, 29-33, 


387n. 8 
eruptions of, 231—232 
INF] type, 
characteristics, 64, 75, 77, 78, 85, 86, 333 
in education setungs, 255, 256 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
therapeutic issues for, 232 
values of, 312-314, 315 
INEP type, 
characteristics, 64, 95-96, 97, 333 
in education settings, 256-258 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314. 315 
Institute for Personality Assessment and 
Research (IPAR), 189-194, 215, 232-233 
intelligence, 162 
Intercultural Communication (Samovar &amp; 
Porter), 376 
interests, and type use in career counseling, 
307-312 
internal consistency reliability, 160—162 
See also reliability 
international, defined, 388n. 1 
International Dimensions of Organizational 
Behavior (Adler), 377 
Internet delivery of MBTI, 112-113 
interpretation guidelines, 13, 104 
as process with respondent, 107-110, 
116-117 
[or research. 112, 116 
results 
accuracv, 107-110, 120, 378 
Form M, 147-149, 151, 152, 156-158 
preference clarity index, 121-123 
type dynamics and development, 1 19-120 
verifying type, 117-119 
lor settings 
career counseling, 322-324 
counseling and psychotherapy, 250-251 
multicultural environments, 376-378 
organizations, 362-365 
schools and training, 280-283 


INT] tvpe, 
characterisucs, 64, 74-75. 76, 333 
in education settings, 255, 256 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312—314, 315 
INTP type, 
characteristics, 64, 85-87, 333 
in edncation settings, 256 
occupational trend of, 293—295 
therapeutic issues for. 232 
values of, 312-314, 315 
Intravisit, A., 371 
Introduction to Type (1. B. Myers, with 
Kirby &amp; K. D. Myers), 63, 118-119, 
197, 283. 292, 330. 334, 338 DFO 
350, 358 
Introduction to Type and Careers (Hammer), 118, 
283,297. 316 
Introduction to Type in College (DiTiberio &amp; 
Hammer), 118, 2 
Introduction to Type Dynamics and Development 
(K. D. Myers &amp; Kirby), 7, 22, 32, 48, 63, 
118, 119, 332, 350, 358 
Introduction to Type in Organizations (Hirsh &amp; 
Kummerow), 118, 283, 292, 330% 332525) 
338, 340, 350, 358, 363 
Introduction to Type and Teams (Hirsh), 
350, 363 
Introversion (1), 
communication style of, 333, 335, 336 
counseling issues related to, 226-227, 
293 
cultural differences in expression of, 222, 
370-371 
description of, 22, 35-26, 175-176 
and preference for privacy, 195-196, 
387n. 5 
and type table format, 36, 37 
work stressors for, 342, 345 
See also types (16); type theory 
Intuition (N), 
communication style of, 333, 335, 
336 
counseling issues related to, 227, 293 
description of, 24, 25, 176, 178 
and type table format, 36, 37 
work stressors for, 342, 345 
See also types (16); type theory 
IP type characteristics, 44, 46-47 
Ireland, M. S., 195 
irey, R., 195 
irrational functions, 24 
IRT. See item response theory (IRT) 
IS type characteristics, 54, 55 
ISF] type, 
characteristics, 64, 67—68, 69, 333 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 
ISEP type, 
characteristics, 64, 91-95, 333 
in education setungs, 256-258 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 
IST) type, 
characteristics, 64, 65-67, 333 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
therapeutic issnes for, 232 
values of, 312-314, 315 
ISTP tvpe, 
characteristics, 64, 81, 83-85, 333 
in education settings, 256 
occupational trend of, 293-295 
values of, 312-314, 315 
IT type characteristics, 59 
item characteristic curve (ICC), 134-139 
item response theory (IRT), 12, 134-135 
in Form M 
applicability, 136-139 
changes, 16-17 
scoring method, 143-149 
itcm weights vs., 110, 146 
measurcment precision using, 
164-169 





417 


Index 





items, 
development of, 11-13, 134 
format 
foreed-choice responses, 5, 7, 15, 141 
phrase quesuons, 12, 123, 141 
word-pair questions, 12, 123, 129, 141, 
388n. | 
omission of, and validity, 109, 132, 133 
and preference clarity index, 7-8 
selection of, 15-16, 139-143 
and previous forms, 128-131 
item weights, 374 
for gender differences, 12, 1-4, 110, 132, 133 
IRT vs., 110, 146 
of previous forms. 129, 130, 132, 133 


Jackson, G. S., 278 
Jackson, S., 238, 278 
Jacobson, C. M., 255, 263-264 
Jaffee, J M., 195 
James, L. R., 173 
Jenkins, D. A., 249 
Jensen, G. H., 275 
job advancement, 108 
job satisfaction, 13, 110, 303-307 
job selection, 108, 293-303 
Johnson, C., 263 
Johnson. D. A., 162, 173 
Johnson, J., 263 
Johnson, J. A., 263 
Johnson, R. W. 189-191 
Johnson, W. M , 279 
Jones, J. H., 231, 369 
Jones, W. J., 263 
Joreskog, K. G.. 173 
Journal of Psychological Type. 219, 295 
J-P dichotomy. 
characteristics of, 6, 22— 
387n. 2 
counseling issues related to, 228-229, 
242 
in education, 278 
in work situations, 286—288, 337 
Judging (J), 371 
communication style of, 333, 335, 336 
counseling issues related to, 228, 293 
description of, 3, 24-27, 183 
leadership styles of, 352-356 
and type table format, 36, 57 
work stressors for, 342, 345 
See also types (16); type theory 
Jung, C. G.. 3, 21-22, 24-25, 27-29, 33, 128, 
157050188, 2284231, 251, 263, 330, 368, 
387nn. 1, 7 
Jungian theory. See type theory 
Jungian Type Survey JTS), 387nn. 3,8 
correlation with MBTI, 174, 175, 179, 
18+, 185 


Ui AS AO 208. 


Kagan, J., 189 

Kainz) he 99572102266, 277, 2029325 

Kaiser, K. M., 130-131 

Kalsbeek, D., 255, 268, 277 

Kassin, 5., 358 

Katzenbach. J. R., 348 

Kersen- DA -0; 48, 59, 197 

Kelly, E. J.. 276 

Kelly, G A., 194 

Kelly, M., 339 

Kendall. B., 340, 374-378 

Kernan-Schloss, L., 195 

Kilburg, R. R.. 352 

Kilmann, R H.. 335, 338 

Kim, J.-T., 373, 375 

Kirby, L. K., 7, 22, 48, 53-54, 58, 63, 106, 
118—120, 204, 219, 232, 241, 281, 283, 292, 
326-327, 330—332, 334-335, 338, 340, 


342-344, 346, 350, 352, 356—358. 367—369, 


371-372, 377—318. 380 

Kirk, B. A., 224 

Kirton, M. J, 191 

Kirton Adaption and Innovation Inventory (KAD, 
191193255 263 94 2369 


Kise,] A G., 346, 350 

Kling, ER , 133 

Knapp, R. H., 195-196 

Kolbs Learning Style Inventory, 263 

Komisin, L. K., 258, 278 

Korea, 369 

Kroeck, K G , 263 

Krumboltz, B. L., 316 

Krumboltz, J. D., 286, 316 

Kuder Occupational Interest Survey, 307 

Kummerow, J. M., 116-118, 157, 174. 197-198, 
250, 265, 283, 292, 307, 911-31 9818, 
332-323, 330, 332, 334, 340, 344. 346, 350, 
358, 363, 309-370 

Kyle, J., 268 


Lamphere, G. L, 265 

Landis, D.. 172 

Lange, B. M., 255 

languages, 
MBTI use in multicultural settings, 372-373 
translanons of MBTI, 28-29, 106, 373-374 

Languis, M. L., 188, 189, 261, 368 

Laposky, A. D., 189 

Lapus, P 5., 195 

Lathey, J. W., 266 

Law Scholastic Aptitude Test (LSAT), 268 


Lawrence; GWLIS, 195. 217. 25342558261, 265. 


216.283. 390 
Layne, B. Hg 195 
Leadership Development (L. Barr &amp; N. Barr), 358 
leadership in organizations, 350, 351, 352-358 
Leadership Style Inventory (LSI), 216-217, 353 
learners, 
characteristics of, 261—264 
in elementary and secondary education, 40, 
276-277 
in higher education, 277, 279 
interactions with teachers, 40, 265-266 
type use in classes, 260-261, 266, 270, 
275-276, 277, 280 
See also education 
learning disabilities, 276 
learning styles, 40, 221 
See also education; learners 
legislation and privacy, 108 
Lehto, B. A., 255-256 
Leibowitz, Z. B., 311-312 
leisure ume and type preferences, 258-260 
Leiter, Me P, 238 
Lent, R. W., 308 
Levell, ] R 2897 
Levin A So 
Levin. L S$ 241—513 
Levine, DEM. 273 
Levy, N., 194, 201, 279, 367, 360 
Liddell, D. L., 263 
Lidgard, C. E, 369 
life-span approach to career development, 319 
LIFE Types (Hirsh &amp; Kummerow), 292 
Lightfoot Facial Expression Series, 194 
likelihood-based scoring approach, 146 
Lim, T. K., 369 
LISREL (measurement software), 173 
literacy and type preferences, 271-275 
log linear analysis, 210-211 
Loomis, M. E., 370 
Louks,] L., 210, 213, 247 
LSAT (Law Scholastic Aptitude Test), 268 
Lueder, 912758 
Luh; S. Bao! 
Lund, S. L., 338 
Lundsten, L. L., 263, 296 
Lynth, A. Q., 274 


Macdaid, G. P, 131, 210-211, 247, 256, 277, 
293, 295-296, 301, 303, 307, 326 

MacKinnon, D. W., 191 

Magidson, J , 203, 210-211 

Mahan, M. P, 278 

Mahoney, J. P, 359, 369 

Mamchur, C., 210 

Managing Transitions (Bridges), 343 


Manfrin, C., 246 

Mann, H., 195, 217 

Manske, D. H , 271, 273 

Mantel-Haenszel stausuc, 142, 152-155 

Marcia, J. E., 195 

Marcus, S. K, 195 

Marioles, N S., 211, 243—245 

Markham, S E., 14, 136-137. 203, 303, 312 

Marrot Psychological Soundness Index , 252, 233, 
234233 

Marshall, N. J., 195-196 

Marun, C. R, 118 

Maslach, C., 238 

Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI), 184, 238-239 

maximum likelihood function, 146 

May D.C H79 

MBI (Maslach Burnout Inventory), 184, 238-239 

MBTI Applications (Hammer), 8, 10, 14, 39, 218, 
2208748, 258. 281, 388n. 1 

MBTI Team Building Program (Hirsh), 344 
Leaders Resource Guide, 350 

McCarley, N. G., 119, 203 

McCary, P. W., 248 

MoCaulleygii. H.. 14, 58. 123, 133, 150, 152, 
163, 173, 191, 195-196, 203, 210-211, 331, 
247-248, 254, 256, 263—264, 266, 268—270, 
273, 376—271, 284, 287, 293, 205—296, 301, 
203, 326, 338, 348, 3679368. 372, 37%: 
377-378 

NicCrae, R R., 203 

McGraw-Hill Basic Skills System Reading Test, 
211.213 

McHenry, R., 374 

measurement error, 1 7], 200 

measurement precision, 164—169, 200 

medicine, specialty choices 1n, 1 26, 196 

Meisgeier, C., 246, 283 

Meisgeier, CHH., 100106, 239, 2467254. 261, 
264, 266, 276, 283, 372 

Melear, C. T., 279 

Mendelsohn, G. A , 224, 247 

Mexico. 369 

midpoint of scales, locating, 13, 14, 132-133, 
141-142, 149-150 

Miller, J. A., 265 

Millner, N. B., 22, 231, 239, 318, 322 

Millon Index of Personality Styles, 174, 175, 076, 
178.179, 183 

Mills, C. ]...255, 278 

Mills, j., 338 

Miner, M G., 256, 265 

Minnesota Department of Economic Security, 293 

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI), 213—214. 229, 247 

minorities. See ethnic groups; multicultural 
settings 

Mishra, A K., 325 

Mitchell, A., 198 

Mitchell, Wi D... 147, 156, 218, 2505392, 322, 
378-379 

MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphase Personality 
Inventory (MMPI) 

Moddy, R., 275 

Molpus, D., 340 

Mongeon, J. E., 329 

Monroe, L B., 275 

Montross, D H , 311-312 

Moody, R., 256 

Moore, D., 271, 273, 277-278, 284 

Moore, L. S., 249 

Moore, N. J., 255, 276 

Morgan, E. R., 263 

Morrill, W. H., 174 

Most, R. B., 131 

motivation and type, 102, 171 

Mulaik, S A., 173 

multicultual, defined, 388n. ! 

Multicultural Assessment Perspective foi 
Professional Psychology (Dana), 370 

Multicultural Counseling Competencies (Sue), 
370 

Multicultural Issues in Assessment (Rollock &amp; 
Terrell), 370 


418 . MBTI! Manual 


mulucultural settings, 367—368, 388nn. 1, 2 
MBTI use in, 368-373 
administration, 375 
interpretation, 376-378 
scoring, 374 
translauons, 373-374 
type distribution samples, 378-384 
type use for conflict resolution in, 337-338 
See also cultura) differences; ethnic groups 
Murphy C., 279 
Murphs;E., 10,106, 239, 236, 23%, 276, 283, 372 
Miaphy-Meisgeier Type Indicator for Children 
(MMTIC), 10, 106, 254, 276, 280, 372 
Murry, W D., 14, 136-137, 172-173, 203. 
303,312 
Myers, 1. B., 3, 5, 7, 9-10, 13-15, 17, 21-22, 26, 


29, 33, 36, 40, 54, 63, 106, 118, 123, 128, 131, 


133, 137, 140, 150, 152, 163-164, 173, 191, 
195-196, 198, 203-204, 209, 229, 231, 233, 
241, 243, 250-251, 253-254, 200-261, 
263-264, 266, 268-270, 273, 276-277, 
279-280, 283-284, 287, 292-293, 295, 301, 
303, 330-331, 334, 338, 340, 348, 350, 358, 


367—368, 372, 374, 377-378, 387nn. 1, 2, 6, 7 


Wiers. K. D., 7,227 848,63,1182120 H1, 285, 
292, 330—332, 340, 350, 358 
Wers. P B3 7, 157211229, 231; 233/285, 251, 
253, 260—261, 268, 277, 279-280, 283-284, 
338 367 
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 
administration of (see administration 
guidelines) 
applications of (see applications) 
background of, 9-10 
overview, 1-8 
purposes, 3, 7, 11, 108, 128 
theory behind, 3, +, 5-7, 19-33 
construction of, 11, 122, 127-158 
development of, 3-4, 11-17 
interpretation of (see interpretation 
guidelines) 
measurement precision of, 164-169 
properties of, 150-156 
reliability of, 159-169 
scoring of, 146-149 
and type descriptions, 35-102 
validity of, 171-219 
See also specific forms 
Myers-Bniggs Type Indicator Atlas of Type Tables 
(Macdaid, McCaulley, &amp; Kainz), 210, 295 


national representative sample (NRS), 156-158, 
388n. ] 

national sample (NS), 143, 156-158, 369 
interests and self-efficacy 1n, 308-311 
job satisfiers and dissatisfiers of, 303—305, 

306 

multicultural type distribution in, 378-379 
values of, 312-314, 315 
work environments for, 288—29] 
See also samples 

Native American respondents, 161-162, 370 
See also ethnic groups 

Naber E1253 

Navigating Midlife (Corlett &amp; Millner?, 319 

Nechworth, J. A., 123 

NEO Personality Inventory, 5, 174, 178 

Neral, S. M., 268 

New Zealand, 369 

Newman, L. E., 189, 247 

NF temperament (Idealist) characterisues, 
61,62 

NT type characteristics, +0, 42-43, 44 

Nicholls, G., 278 

Nigeria, 369 

Nighungale, J. A., 195 

NJ type characteristics, 51-52 

Noer, D. M., 340, 341 

NP type characteristics, 50-51 

NRS (national representative sample), 156-158, 
388n. | 

NS. See national sample (NS) 

NT temperament (Rational) characteristics, 59, 
61-63 


NT type characteristics, 40, +3-44, 45 
Nyikos, M., 264 


OAIS (Opinion, Attitude, and Interest Scales), 307 
ohserver ratings, 191 
of type dynamics, 204—205 
in validity studies, 215-217 
O Haire, T. D., 195 
Ohsawa, T., 367 
omissions vs. guessing, 109, 132, 133 
Opinion, Attitude, and Interest Scales (OAIS), 307 
optimism and pessimism, 196 
organizations, 
MBTI use in, 325-326 
administration, 359-362 
interpretanon, 362-365 
introduction, 326—330 
and type use, 13, 325-326 
for analysis of company, 358-359 
for change, management of, 341-344 
for communication effectiveness, 
332-335, 336 
for conflict resolution, 335—339 
for decision making, 339-341, 349 
dynamic and development aspects of, 
330-332 
for leadership development, 352-358 
for problem solving, 339-341, 349 
for stress management, 344—348 
for team effectiveness, 38-352 
orientauon, 6 
See also attitude 
© Saben Tem MT 
O'Shea, T., 210 
Osmond, H., 195, 217 
Ostrowski, B., 369 
Oswick, C., 359, 369 
Otis, G. D.. 2102213, 242, 2772248 
Outcalt, Deeb? 2 
outer world, attitudes of, 26-27, 29 
See also names of specific attitudes 
Owen, C., 194 
Oxford Psychologists Press, 116, 197, 374, 379 
Oxford, R., 258. 264, 275 


Palmiere, L., 195 
Palomba, C., 277-278, 284 
Park, J. S., 375 
Parker, W. D., 255, 276 
Parsons, C., 134 
Payne, D., 283, 338 
pci. See preference clarity index (pci) 
Pearman, R. R, 216, 338, 3532358. 359 
Penley J. P, 246 
Penn, B. K., 261 
People Types and Tiger Stripes (Lawrence), 283 
Perceiving (P), 
communication style of, 334, 335, 336 
counseling issues related to, 228-229, 293 
description of, 3, 24, 26-27, 183 
and type table format, 36, 37 
work stressors for, 342, 345 
See also types (16); type theory 
Percival ORS 
Perelman, S. G., 248 
Pers H. ve. 2T 
persistence, academic, 277 
personality instruments, +-5, 108, 134 
pessimism and optimism, 196 
Peterson, L., 311-312 
Petty, M. L., 278 
Pickerill, B., 277-278, 284 
Pieper, W A., 184 
Pini, R., 340 
Pitts, C... 259 
Poillon, M J.. 276 
points, raw, in Form M, 147-148 
Poirer, D., 374 
Poling, T. H., 263 
Pollard, C. K., 268 
population. See ethnic groups; respondents, 
samples 
Porter, R. E., 376 
Positive and Negative Affectivity Scales, 239 





post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 213-214 
Power, S. J., 263, 296 
PPS (Preference for Privacy Scale), 195-196 
PR method See prediction ratio (PR) scoring 
method 
prediction ratio (PR) scoring method, 12, 15-16 
and changes for Form M, 16-17, 131, 141 
lor evaluation of scoring, 143-149 
of previous forms, 129, 136 
preference clarity, defined, 148 
preference clarity categories, 112, 122, 147, 
148-149 
preference clarity index (pci), 
defined, 7—8, 121, 148 
in Form M, 147-148 
Interpreting, 112, 121-1234204 
Preference for Privacy Scale (PPS), 195-196 
preference scale interactions, 199-203 
preference scores, 121, 172-196 
preferences, 6-8, 11, 117 
dynamic interaction of, 29-33, 119—120, 
387nn. 7,8,9 
groupings 
characteristics, 38—63 
identifying, 37-38 
as innate, 188-189, 190, 387n. 10 
See also individual preferences; types (16) 
Prehn, T., 198 
prejudice, 27 
See also bias; Judging (J) 
PRELIS 2 (measurement software), 173 
Price SD ten 3 
Prince, R A..559 
Pritchett, P, 341 
privacy, 
and legislation, 108 
preference for, 126, 195-196 
problem solving, 
in organizational settings, 339-341, 349 
See also decision making 
processes, 
defined, 6 
See also functions 
procrastination, 27 
Provost, J. A., 232, 256, 258,261: 2657S 
283, 292 
Psychological Types Gung), 22, 25. 140 
Psychological Type in Schools (Van Sant &amp; 
Payne), 283 
psychotherapy, 213-215, 222 
See also counseling 


Quenk, A. T., 53, 224, 231-232, 246—249 
Quenk, N. L., 22, 53, 196, 224, 229, 231-232, 
239, 242, 246—250, 287, 322, 346, 387n. 7 


Randall, K. P, 278-279 
Random House, 148 
rapport in counseling, 224 
rater bias, 191 
See also observer ratings 
rational functions, 24 
Rational (NT temperament) characteristics, 59, 
61-63 
reading, 
levels, 162 
for use of MBTI, 106, 109, 372, 379-381, 
388n. | 
and type preferences, 271—275 
See also education 
Real People, Real Jobs (Montross, Leibowitz, &amp; 
Shinkman), 312 
Reise, S. P, 134 
relationships, 
of couples, 211-213, 240-245 
ot families, 245-246 
of team members, 349 
reliability, 159-160 
age group as influence on, 5, 106, 126 
internal consistency estimates, 160-162 
measurement precision, 164—169 
m multicultural use, 106, 369 
and omissions on answer sheets, 109, 132, 133 
test-retest. 14, 16, 162-164 


research, 9, 10, 12, 112, 387u. 10 
on interpretation problems, 38-40 
ou patterns in types, 63-102 
on preference groupings, 38-63 
on reliability, 14, 116 
for type approach to counseling, 246-249 
on type use in education, 254-260 
respondents, 
administration guidelines for, 108—110 
E from, 107-108, 109 
verifying type with, 116, 117-119 
responses. 15, 131 
answer sheet for, 109, 1]2 
foreed-choice format of, 5, 7, 15, 141 
omissions of, 109, 132, 133 
results of Form M, 
companson to Form G, 151. 152, 156-158 
kinds of, 147-149 
Sce also interpretation guidelines 
retention, student, 277 
emere J. ry. 341, 352, 359 
RIASEC theory of vocational interests, 307. 
308-311 
Rich, B., 184 
Richardson, $.. 279 
RiglewD. A.. 255 
Robbins, M. A., 255. 268, 278 
Robbins, 5. B., 174 
Roberds-Baxter, S. L , 255-256, 258 
Robey, D., 338 
Robinson, D. C., 276, 278, 283 
Rodgers, R. E, 119 
Rogers, H. J., 134 
Role Construct Repertory Test, 194 
Rollock, D., 370 
Rosati, P, 277 
Rosin, P L., 279 
Ross, J.. 187 
Ross, S. 1., 279 
Roush IE E 277 
Rousseau, D. M , 286 
Ruane, F V, 194 
Ruble, V. E., 255, 258, 266, 268, 276-278, 284 
Ruhl, D. L., 119 
Rytting, M., 359 


Sakamoto, K., 369 
Salazar, K., 370, 375 
Salience Inventory, 182 
Salter, D. W., 278 
Samovar, L. A., 376 
Sample, J. Ay, 263, 332 
samples, 
multicultural type distribution in, 378-384 
population of, 128, 129-130, 142 
of previous forms, 128, 129 
size requirement for valid research, 
200, 201 
Sec also national sample (NS) 
Sanchez, G., 370, 375 
Sapp, G. L.. 255, 261. 263-264 
SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test), 266-267 
satisfaction, 
with job, 13, 110, 303-307 
with relationships, 211-213, 244-245 


Saunders, D. R.. 4, 13, 127-128, 131, 173, 250, 


283.322 
Savickas, M. L., 318 
scales, 
intercorrelations between Form G and 
Form M, 152. 153 
midpoint of, locaung, 13, 14. 132-133, 
141-142, 149-150 
See also scoring 
Schacht, A. J., 248-249 
Schadt, D. O., 249, 316, 323 
Schaeler, G. L., 263-264 
Scherdin, M. J., 296 
Schilling, K. L., 247 
Schmeck, R. R., 263-264 
Schmidt uA 737353751371 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT), 266-267 
schools. Sec education 
Schroeder C C., 278 


Schurr, K. T., 255, 258, 266, 268, 270, 
275-278, 284 
Schutz, W., 218 
SCH CStrong-Canmpbell Interest Inventory), 218 
scoriug, 13 
of Form M, 16-17, 110-113 
development, 143-146 
IRT use, 146-149 
gender differences in, 12, 14 
issues in multicultural settings, 374 
self-scorable versions, 106—107, 109-112, 
130-132, 145-146, 172 
by templates, 109, 110-112, 145-146 
Scc alse Step l scoring method; Step I1 
sconng method; Step Hil scoring method 
scars, SMA 261, 263 
second function. Scc auxiliary function 
secondary education, type usc in, 276-277, 
279-280 
Seiden, H M., 195 
selection, job, 108, 293-303 
self-esteem, 13, 225. 
self-estimates, 196-198, 216-218 
self-report instruments, 11, 116, 120 
seli-scorable versions, 
Form M, 106-107, 110-112, 145-146 
Form G, 106, 109, 130-131, 132, 172 
self-selection rauo (SSR), 36, 296, 297-300 
scli-sclection ratio type table (SRTT), 210 
Sellers; BA], 277 
Sensing (S), 371, 387n. 1 
communication style of, 334, 335, 336 
counseling issues related to, 227, 293 
description of, 24, 25, 176 
and type table format, 36, 57 
work stressors for, 342, 345 
Scc also types (16); type theory 
Severino, C. J., 275 
SF type characteristics, 39, 41. 43 
Shauklin, G., 278 
Shelton, J., 54, 59, 224, 235, 237, 246 
Sherman, R. G., 231, 245 
Shiflett 6.204 
Shipley Institute of Living Seale, 213 
shoes-off self, dehned, 109 
Short, G. J , 347 
Shrinkman, C. J.. 311-312 
Shuck, ] , 246 
Siegler, M., 195, 217 
Sim, H -S, 373, 375 
Simmons. G., 369 
Singer, M.. 273 
Singer-Loomis Inventory, 370 
Sipps, G. J., 172-173 


16 Personality Factors Questionnaire (16PF), 174, 


175 

SJ temperament (Guardian) characteristics, 
59-60 

SJ type characteristics, 48-49, 50 

Skills Confidence Inventory, 174, 181 

Slatt, L. Mi, 277 

Sleight. C. C , 326 

Sloan. E. D., 266 

Smith, A., 195 

Smith, D. K., 348 

Smith, L., 338 

Smith, N. P, 195 

Smitheram, V., 339 

S-N dichotomy, 
characteristics of, 6, 262, 263, 387n. 2 
counseliug issues related to, 227, 242 
in education, 278 
in work situations, 286-288, 336 

Suidman, N., 189 

software, 110, 112, 173 

Sorbom, D., 173 

Sotillo, S., 369 

South African eulture, 369-370, 371 

SP temperament (Artisan) characteristics, 59, 
60-61 

SP type characteristics, 49-50, 51 

spintuality, 237 

split-half reliability, 160—161 
See also rehability 


419 


Index 





Spokane, A R., 307 

Springer, T P, 279 

Squyres, E M . 195 

SRTT (self-selection ratio type table), 210 

SSR. Sce self-selection ratios (SSR) 

ST type characterisucs, 39, 40—42 

Stamoulis, D., 137, 172-173 

standardizauon sample, 13, 14. 17 

Starting Out, Starting Over (Peterson), 311-312 

State- Traut Anxiety Inventory, 184 

static level of type interpretation, 317 

Steele, G. E., 263 

Stein, P, 369 

Stenberg, G., 189 

Step l sconing method, 10, 13 

Step ll scoring method, 
and changes for Form M, 15-16, 140-141 
clarifying preferences with, 121-122 
EIR report, 32-33, 107, 121, 387n. 5 
explained, 10, 13, 322 

Step III scoring method, 10, 13, 16 

Stephens, D. W., 246 

Stephens, W. B., 194 

Stephenson, R. W., 194 

St. Germain, C. J., 266 

Stoddard, A H.. 263-264 

Strategies for Success (Provost), 283 

Stratton, B. D., 255-256, 258 

stress, 120 
coping strategies for, 236-238 
implications of research on, 235-239 
management of, in organizations, 344—348 
and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 

213-214 

aud substance abuse, +5, 246 

Strickert, D. P, 211. 243-285 

Strong-Campbell Interest Inventory (SCID, 218 

Strong Interest Inventory, 113, 249, 307, 318 
and validity, 174, 180-181 

substance abuse, 45, 246 
Scc also stress 

Sne, D. W., 370 

Sundstrom, E., 353 

Super, C.M, 318 

Super, D. E. 2183318 

Swaminathan, H., 134 

Swank, P, 261, 264, 266 

Swansom, J. L., 249 

Systematic Multiple- Level Observation of Groups 
(SYMLOG), 353 


Taggart, W. M., 263 
Tanouye, A , 369 
Tavlor. F 147278 
TCA] (Team Communication Adjustment Index), 
351 
TCC. See test characteristic curves (TCC) 
teachers, 
in elementary and secondary education, 40, 
276-277 
in higher education, 277, 279 
interactions with learners, 265-266 
type use iu classes, 260-201, 266, 270, 
275-276, 277, 280 
See also education; learners 
Teachers Guide to Type, A (Meisgeter, Murphy, &amp; 
Meisgeicr), 283 
Team Communication Adjustment Index (TCAD, 
351 
Icam Members Guide (Hirsh), 350 
teams in organizations, 348-352 
Tellegen, A., 239 
temperament theory, 59-63 
template-scorable version (Form M), 109, 
110—112, 145-146 
Terrell. M D., 370 
Terrill. J. L. 247 
tertiary function, 
counselors assessment of, 231-232 
defined, 28, 30, 120 
in dynamic interaction of preferences, 29-33, 
387n. 7 
test characteristic curves (TCC), 152-155 
test information function (TIE), 165-169 


420 . MBTI Manual 





test-retest reliability, 14, 16, 162-164 
See also reliability 
test standard error (TSE) function, 165-169 
T-F dichotomy, 
charactensucs of, 6, 262, 263-264 
counseling issues related to, 227, 242 
in education, 278 
in work situations, 286-288, 336—337 
Tharp, G. D., 268 
therapy. See counseling 
Thinking (T), 
communication style of, 333, 335, 336 
counseling issues related to, 227-228, 293 
description of, 24-25, 178-179 
leadership styles of, 352-356 
and type table format. 36, 37 
work stressors for, 342, 343, 345 
See also types (16); type theory 
third function. See tertiary function 
Thomas, K. W, 335, 338 
Thomas, L., 4#-15713% 136, 139 
Thomas-Kilmann Conflict Mode Instrument 
(MODE), 339 
Thomason. R. S., 271, 27) 
Thompson, B., 172-173 
Thompson, M., 387n. 7 
ThornegA®, 189020213 15216228263 17. 
SPEE Die 
Thorne, B. M., 271, 273 
tie-breaking formula, 
in Form E, 12-13, 130, 133 
in bormNissl3.od*? 
Leger, P Davo? 
TIE See test information function (TIF) 
time, 
and limit for MBTI, 109 
type orientation to, 126, 194-195, 217-218 
Tune Management Questionnaire, 195 
Tischler, L., 172, 303 
TJ type characteristics, 52-53 
Tobacyk, J. J., 279 
Toothaker, L. E., 206 
Touhey JSE.. 195 
TP type charactenstics, 53-54 
trait models and instruments, 5, 11 
transition stages, 343 
Sec also change 
translations, 28-29, 106, 373-374 
See also multicultural settings 
treatment strategies, 248 
See also counseling 
Trontvent, R.. 263-264 


true type, 
and best-fit type, 16-17, 107-108, 116—118, 
154—145 


defined, 107, 147 
TSE. See test standard error (TSE) function 
Tullar, W., 191 
turnover, 305-307 
Type and Change (Barger &amp; Kirby), 328, 343 
Type Differentiation Indicator (TDI), 107, 131 
See also Step lll scoring method 
type distributions, 210-211, 378-384 
types (16), 
applications 
in career counseling, 285-324 
in counseling and psychotherapy, 
223-25] 
in education, 253-284 
in multicultural settings, 367-384 
in organizations, 325—365 
characteristics, 7, 63-102 
assumptions, 8, 11 
groupings of preferences, 37-63 
and type tables, 36-37 
dynamics, 203 
counseling issues related to, 229-232, 243 
validity research on, 198-217 


types (16) continued 
identification 
descriptions, 31-33, 118, 331-332 
preference order, 30-31 
interpretation and verification of, 115-123 
results of Form M, 147-149, 151, 152, 
156-158 
validity of, 210-218 
whole types 
knowledge of, 232-233 
validity of, 196-218 
See also preferences; type theory 
type tables, 36—37, 210, 379-381 
four attitudes in, 44-48 
four combinations of judgment in, 52-54 
four mental functions in, +0-44 
four onentations of energy and judgment, 
57-59 


four orientations of energy and perception, 


54-57 

four combinations of perception in, 
48-52 

four temperaments, 59-63 

See also types (16) 

type theory, 

attitudes or orientations, 25-27 

and development of type, 27-29 
characteristics, 35-102 
counseling issues, 220-232 
explaining, 119-120 

overview, 3, 4, 5-7 
assumptions, 8, 1] 
functions, 23-25 
history, 22-24 

preferences 
characteristics of groups, 38-63 
dynamic interaction, 29-33, 119-120, 

387nn. 7,8,9 

identifying groups, 37-38 

See also dynamics of type; types (16) 

Tzeng.) uS 


Ukishima, J., 369 
Understanding Cultures Influence on Behavior 
(Brislin), 376 
Understanding Yourself and Others (Berens), 
388n. | 
unidimensionality, defined, 137 
uniqueness, 
doctrine of, 21 
levels of, 368 
United Kingdom, 116, 369, 371, 379 
universities, type use in, 277-279, 280 
universality of types, 28-29, 388n. 2 
Using the Myers-Briggs lype Indicator in 
Organizations (Hirsh), 328, 330 
Using Iype in Selling (Brock), 118, 334 


Vaccaro, A. J., 316 
validity, 5, 108, 120, 171-172 
and construct validity, 36, 37, 174, 210 
in other cultures, 106, 369 
of preference scales 
behavioral differences, 126, 189-191, 
192-193 
correlation of continuous scores, 
173-184 
creativity, 19], 194 
dichotomies, evidence for, 126, 
185-189, 190 
differences between preferences, 
194-196 
factor analysis, 172-173 
with Jungian Type Survey, 184, 185 
research resources, 218-219 
of whole types 
dynamics theory, 126, 203-210 
preferences interactions, 199-203 


validity continued 
research on, 210-218 
self-estimates, 196-198 
values, 171, 218 
of collectivists, 369—370 
and type use in career counseling, 312-315 
See also Judging J) 
Values Scale, 182 
Van Rooyen, J., 369 
Van Sant, S., 283, 338 
Van Velsor, E., 353 
Vaughan, J. A., 196 
Veach, T. L., 195 
Verble, J. S., 195 
Verifying Your Type Preferences (Kummerow), 117 
vocational interests, and type use in career 
counseling, 307—312 
Vocational Preference Inventory (VPD, 307 
Vollbrecht, E E., 263 
von Franz, M.-L., 196 
Vondran, K. A., 275 
VPI (Vocational Preference Inventory), 307 


Walck, C. L., 116, 157, 197-198, 296, 340, 
344, 358 

Waller, N. G., 134 

Walsh, R., 256 

Walter, K. M., 265 

Walters, N. J., 258 

Waltz E. B. 232 

Waltz-Gough Efficacy Index, 232-233 

Ware, R.,172, 197, 359 

Watson, D., 239 

Watson, M. M., 258, 278 

Watts, ]., 369 

Wasmire, C. H., 258 

Weaver, G., 388n. 2 

Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, 194 

Wederspahn, A., 372-373 

weighting of items. See item weights 

Weir, D. M., 248 

Weisbord, M., 337 

Wellins, R. S., 348 

Wells, D. H., 279 

Westermau, G. H., 277 

Wheelwright, J B., 184, 387nn. 3,8 

Wheelwright, J. H., 184, 387nn 3,8 

White respondents, 156 
See also ethnic groups 

Whittemore, R. G , 194 

Williams, M. S., 326 

Williams, R., 276 

Williams, R. L., 195 

Wilmoth, J. N., 258 

Wilson, ] M., 348 

Wilson, M. A., 188, 189, 261, 368 

Wittig, A. E, 276, 278 

WIZE) S ^48 

women, cultural roles of, 14 

Woodruff, R. G. V, 255, 268 

Work Environment Scale, 183, 287, 289 

Work it Out (Hirsh &amp; Kise), 346, 350 

Work, Play, and Type (Provost), 292 

WORK Types (Kummerow, Barger, &amp; Kirby), 292, 
334, 344, 346, 350, 358 

Wark Values Inventory (WVD, 218 

World Wide Web, 112-113 

writing style and type preferences, 222, 273-275 

WVI (Work Values Inventory), 218 


Yang, A. 1., 195 

Yao, Y., 369 

Yeakley, E R., 116, 197, 2347330, 33%, 340 
Yokomoto, C. F, 197, 266, 275 

Yong, M., 377 


Zietsmann, G., 369 
Zimmerman, A., 263 





RI 








e 








Op 


Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc. 
g Psycholog 


3803 E. Bayshore Road 
Palo Alto, California 94303 
800-624-1765 
www.mbti.com 

6111 


J 
Liem 
€ 


* &amp; “ya ls E 





»^ 
4 i 


&amp; 
8 
= he 
"e oul — 
| ew 
* 
gm. 
€ ^ 
a P» 
é 2 4 
AN £ 
uii ~. » * 
-" é 
€ y 
* 
\ 


ISBN 0- 28EIBE5— TST 


90000» i 
9"78089 1"06 1304 


Ca a 


se tbt 
